Obligations as Thought Experiments
MIKKO YRJONSUURI
The late medieval logical genre of obligations is no more fully obscure. It
is now getting clear to modern scholars what is going on in the texts. We know
that the treatises describe a highly specialized technique of obligational
disputations. This technique can more or less be characterized as a game
between two persons: the opponent and the respondent. The setting leaves
room also for a third person, a judge, whose role would be to evaluate the
appropriateness of what the other participants do.
There are good reasons for calling the game dialectical. At least on the
surface, most of what happens amounts to evaluations of statements made by
the opponent. Furthermore, it seems clear that the aim of the rules given for the
game is to determine in some sense correct evaluations for the statements made.
It even seems plausible that to large extent this correctness is of the same sort as
we expect from our colleagues in ordinary philosophical discussions. A
disputant is expected, first and foremost, to keep consistently behind her
expressed views. She must grant whatever follows from her earlier statements,
and deny anything repugnant with them. Generally, she must also adhere to
what she knows to be the case. To this extent, obligational theory amounts to a
general theory of dispute with only minor technical assumptions of the format
of conversation.
1. Special Dialectical Duties
There are lots of strange features in the examples presented in obligations
treatises. If we look at, for example, Walter Burley's treatise on obligations
(Burley 1963 and 1988), we find all kinds of strange things happening in the
described obligational disputations. In almost all examples the respondent must
grant such sentences that are clearly known to be false. Often even impossible
sentences must be granted. Sometimes a sentence is granted even if it is not
possible to imagine that the case is as the sentence claims. In some examples
the respondent must pretend that he is someone else. In others he pretends that
words signify something they usually don't. He may also pretend that he
knows something he simply does not know. Or doubt sentences he
unambiguously knows.
80 Mikko Yrjonsuuri
A natural question arising when faced with such examples is to ask: why?
Why do these disputations imagined and described by Burley go into such
strange directions?
From the treatise itself we find a simple and effective answer, which
unfortunately turns out to tell only how rather than why. As Burley tells us, in
a disputation it is possible to give the respondent some sort of a special
obligation.1
The idea is that the opponent may ask the respondent to bind
himself as to a duty to certain kinds of disputational acts or dispositions: if the
respondent agrees, there is a temporary special duty for him. The special duty
overrides the general duty to follow the truth, and sometimes it overrides even
the general duty to keep consistent. Since this duty can be of almost any sort,
all kinds of weird disputations result. It is the point of obligational theory to
classify and analyze these weird disputations.
This picture of what is happening in obligational theory is not limited to
Burley, even if I will use him in the following as the standard example. It
seems that all authors writing on obligations understood their mission in
approximately these terms. I also believe that modern commentators of the
obligational tradition more or less agree on this prima facie description of the
genre. This is what we have in the treatises. Some disagreement may arise on
whether these special duties have any ethical character. In my view, they are as
ethical as (but no more than) the general logical duty to avoid contradicting
oneself in discussion.
In the definitions given in fourteenth century treatises on obligations,
obligatio is often a certain kind of technique (ars). Sometimes obligatio is
defined to be a sentence, with the idea of calling the obligation proper the
sentence by which the opponent gives the special duty at issue. Paul of Venice
takes a curiously different approach: he defines obligatio as a relation,
seemingly understanding duties as relations: in an obligational disputation the
respondent has a duty to the opponent in fulfilling the assigned special task.
This means that there is a relation of duty between the opponent and the
respondent.2
This general picture is quite clear, I believe, but the philosophical work
only begins here. When we have seen that Burley and others are classifying
and analyzing weird disputations resulting from agreed weird dialectical
behaviour, it is not at all clear what is the philosophical import of this logical
genre. We must also make it clear what were the interesting tilings found by the
medieval scholars that motivated them to do these classifications and analyses.
The practical side of the technique gives a partial explanation.
Disputations were a common practice of medieval academic life, and
Obligations as Thought Experiments 81
consequently there is a general practical motivation for finding out how a
disputation looks like if the respondent agrees to some kind of special duty.
Given this setting, it seems clear why the study of obligations converged
in a limited number of interesting duties to be imposed to the respondent. The
reason for interest was different in every case, but uninteresting alternatives
dropped out of research. No obligational treatise considers, for example, the
duty of keeping one eye closed when answering questions.
Some examples, though, seem to be considered simply due to their
curious character. Burley takes up a case where the respondent is asked to
answer on behalf of Brunellus, the donkey. As Burley points out, the
respondent should not in this situation grant the sentence 'you are a donkey', if
the pronoun is directed, not to Brunellus, but to the respondent, who is a man.3
As the idea is to give special obligations to the respondent, it is natural
that certain cases are interesting because they illuminate some features of norms
in general. To keep in Burley, I may mention his discussions of conditional
norms, arising through the idea that the opponent may give the special
obligation so that it is understood to be valid only when a certain condition is
fulfilled. Typically the condition is a disputational act so that it is easy to
consider how the obligation comes into force and possibly also how it ceases to
be valid. In these discussions Burley takes up the general requirements that the
condition must be consistent with the implementation of the obligation, and that
it must be distinct from the content of the obligation.4
The two classes of special obligations that medieval scholars apparently
took as most interesting were called institutio and positio. In institutio the issue
was signification of words. The basic idea was to give a string of words, or
simply one or more letters, and to tell the respondent to pretend that these
signify some specified things. In some cases the duty was conditional, so that
the pretended signification applies only when certain conditions are filled. It is
easy to see that such cases can be interesting in relation to looking at how
signification behaves as a relation. The conditional character of some of the
pretended significations allows also constructions relevant to paradoxes
reminiscent of the liar's paradox.
According to Walter Burley's definition, in positio the respondent is
given the duty of holding some sentence as true {habendum pro vero).5
In the
context of this definition it is made clear that this does not mean that the
disputation should go as if the positum really were true. It is just to be to some
extent treated as if it were true. The point of the further discussion is to
formulate clear rules telling what the respondent has to do in order to implement
this special duty.
82 Mikko Yrjonsuuri
The medieval authors generally first and foremost put forward as a rule
that the position must be granted if it is put forward in the disputation. This is
quite natural. Known true sentences generally ought to be granted; otherwise
we call the disputant inhonest. It does not make any sense to straightforwardly
deny a sentence that is to be held as true.
Slightly more interesting is that authors of obligations treatises tell that
anything following from the positum must be granted, and anything repugnant
with it must be denied. The idea is to demand consistent answers. These duties
require in practice that the positum is explicitly kept in mind—which is
relatively clear as a supposition. The rules often point out a second requirement:
the inferential relation must be known to the respondent. With these two
background suppositions the rules are natural. A disputant indeed seems to
behave indecently if he has in mind a sentence held as true, knows something
to follow from it, and yet denies the sequent proposition. Such straightforward
violations of consistence are either unfair in disputational context or result in an
immediate defeat in front of an audience.
Modern commentators have sometimes wondered why the positum is
typically false, so that in the examples false sentences are held as true. Given
the above description of what happens in obligations treatises, it seems quite
natural for the positum to be false. No special obligation is needed to hold a
true sentence as true. It must be held as true simply because it is true. Instead,
if we find a case where interesting results follow when some false sentence is
held as true, we need some manner to impose the obligation to hold it as true.
What I find interesting is that the medieval authors often state so clearly
that holding a sentence as true is distinct from pretending that the case is as the
sentence signifies.6
The idea in holding a sentence as true is not to behave as if
the world were as the sentence claims. In this sense obligational disputations
are strictly distinguished from counterfactual thinking. In fact, several authors
writing on obligations occasionally employ in their examples a double structure
of casus and positum. First the pretended reality is described by the casus, and
then a false sentence is given as a positum, to be held as true. The latter
assumption, positum lies at the focus of interest.
Employing a positum gives a formal flavour to the disputation. Instead of
being connected to real or imagined situations, the disputation is connected to
sets and sequences of sentences. Often the point is to construct consistent sets
of sentences, perhaps retrospectively amounting to descriptions of situations
not bothered to be imagined during the game. As I see it, this formal character
of obligational disputations gives most of the flavour of weirdness we
encounter in them. That the sentences are false does not matter as much as that
they lack interpretations within the disputation.
Obligations as Thought Experiments 83
The technique of positio was unambiguously dominant in the medieval
treatments of obligations. A clear majority of the quantity of text was dedicated
to this branch of obligations. Many treatments dismiss discussion of the other
alternatives. In others positio is taken as the model which other types of
obligation follow. The case of Roger Swyneshed is especially illuminating.7
He
considers three kinds of obligations: impositio, positio and depositio. Depositio
is similar to positio, except that there a true sentence is held as false instead of
holding a false sentence as true. According to Swyneshed, depositio amounts
to positio of the opposite. Impositio corresponds to Burley's institutio.
The peculiar character of Swyneshed's impositio comes strikingly up in
his claim that the sentence itself is irrelevant to the impositio of that sentence.
He gives an example that simultaneously illustrates nicely how obligational
disputations are both weird and logically interesting. The example is as follows:
Let it be supposed that the sentence 'this is false' signifies precisely that God
exists. Then 'this is false' is put forward.8
According to Swyneshed the respondent should deny the paradoxical
sentence 'this is false', even if he has accepted the impositum '"this is false'
signifies that God exists". Here the modern reader easily gets confused, and
there seems to be some reason to suppose that also medieval readers got
confused.
However, I think that the example can be read in a way that makes it very
straightforward and even simple. The idea is to read the example as it were a
case of positio. This is legitimate if I am right in thinking that Swyneshed
classified it as impositio because the sentence to be held as true concerns
relations of signification. Swyneshed's impositio would thus be equal to
positio, except for the fact that the positum concerns meanings of sentences. As
a disputation based on a positio, the example runs as the following table shows:
Dl
Po 'This is false' signifies precisely that God exists
Accepted, possible
Prl This is false Denied, irrelevant and false.
As a positum, it is natural to read the obligation given in the example as a
duty to hold as true that the string of sounds 'this is false' signifies that God
exists. Since Swyneshed wrote in Latin, the translation might even run: "Let it
be supposed that 'hoc est falsum' signifies that God exists." Now, according to
Swyneshed's solution of the liar's paradox, the respondent must deny
sentences, which assert their own falsity. This fact is logically independent
from any claim about the signification of the string of sounds 'hoc est falsum'
84 Mikko Yrjonsuuri
(or 'this is false'). Thus the respondent must deny that the sentence put forward
is false even if she holds as true that the words 'hoc est falsum' (or 'this is
false') signify that God exists.
2. Thought Experiments
In the rest of my paper, I will try to look in some detail at one way in
which positio can naturally be seen as a substantially interesting disputational
technique. I do not in any sense claim that my remarks disclose the sole
purpose why medieval authors thought and wrote about obligations. However,
I do think that what I am going to say, lies very much at the heart of at least the
early fourteenth century interest in obligations.
Elsewhere, I have suggested that obligations "could serve as a
methodology for sophismata"9
or, in other words, as a technique for thought
experiments.10
In Yrjonsuuri 1994 I have worked out in some detail the idea
that an obligational disputation works as a thought experiment through
assuming a technical format for constructing a possible situation. As such a
technique, obligations can be seen as providing rules of how to develop the
casus of a sophisma.
My possible worlds-interpretation of obligations distinguishes sharply
from the much criticized one by Paul Spade (1982), even if it can naturally be
seen as a revised version of it. In my model, the possible world is built, not
described in the process. This implies that obligations are of no use for
counterfactual reasoning in the subjunctive sense.
Here, I try to develop the idea that obligational disputations are thought
experiments from a slightly different viewpoint. As an entrance to the
discussion, let me quote a description of the purposes of obligations given in
the anonymous De arte obligatoria found in Merton college ms. 306.11
"There are three reasons why casus are supposed. The first is to test
whether the respondent possesses the art. The second is to provide
direction, as happens among people talking together for the sake of an
exercise. The third reason is so that we may admit something false [but]
possible while finding out what follows in order that we may know what to
do and how to respond when things are in fact as the false casus indicates.
For jurists and moral philosophers in their attempts to find out about things
that have to be observed before [the situation] actually occurs investigate the
truth that ought to be established by means of possible casus in exercises.
Natural philosophers, on the other hand, more especially contemplate the
speculative knowledge that has to do with men's concepts and intentions."
Obligations as Thought Experiments 85
The variety of three purposes put forward in this text is interesting. It
may be based on Aristotle's division of the three purposes of dialectical games,
found in Topics I, 2, but even if it were original to the author, it would deserve
attention.
The two first purposes have been paid attention in modern evaluations of
obligations. Indeed, it seems indubitable that the obligational technique was
used in the fourteenth century for the pedagogical purposes of examination and
exercise. However, I wish to follow the anonymous author in giving most
attention to the third purpose connected to substantial philosophical work.
I think that we should not read the preliminary description of the third
purpose too literally. Obligations are not of much value in terms of preparation
to possible situations, neither in prospect of finding oneself in ethically
problematic situations, nor in relation to application of concepts of natural
philosophy in practice. I believe that the anonymous author rather had in mind
the methodology of taking up possible situations in order to learn from them
something applicable generally. This methodology is nowadays called thought
experiments.
Thought experiments have been widely employed in considerations of
moral problems throughout the history of philosophy. Principles of ethics have
practically always been illuminated by imagining and discussing situations
where principles are drawn into apparent or real conflicts. It thus ought not
seem strange that also a fourteenth century philosopher remarks that ethics
employs thought experiments.
In natural philosophy, the situation is even more interesting. Fourteenth
century natural philosophy, especially in England, is well known to have
proceeded secundum imaginationem. Whatever that label strictly means in full,
one part of it is the idea of leaning on imagined situations rather than real ones.
Quite naturally, this means wide application of thought experiments.
Much of the modern discussion on thought experiments is concerned
with the fact that thought experiments are a kind of armchair philosophy. They
proceed through introspection. This makes many empirically minded
philosophers suspicious about the results. However, it must be kept in mind
that the results must be logical or conceptual, just as the above quoted
anonymous author points out in connection to natural philosophers. Indeed, in
conceptual and logical issues actual facts have no privileged status.
Conceptually or logically possible states of affairs can serve as evidence just as
well as actual facts.
Immediately after describing the purposes of obligational disputations,
the anonymous author quoted above goes into an example of the third purpose.
86 Mikko Yrjonsuuri
According to him, the example is given quantum ad logicam. There is some
temptation to read this as telling that the problems are neither in the field of
ethics nor in the field of natural philosophy. Rather, the example illustrates
discussion of logical problems. Norman Kretzmann and Eleonore Stump have
in their translation rendered it "as far as the logic [of it] goes." This is a
possible reading, especially for my purposes, since I try to look at how
obligations serve as a technique of thought experiments. Thus, I am not
interested in the example from the substantial point of view, but from the
logical point of view. I will now turn into an enlarged paraphrase of the
example from this viewpoint.
The example is concerned with finding the correct interpretation of the
logical function of the word 'omnis' (every). In the early fourteenth century, it
was a matter of elementary logic that this word allows some kind of descent to
particulars. Singular statements predicating B to singular terms falling under the
concept A follow from the universal statement 'every A is B'.
Now, the example given by the anonymous author points out some
problems in how the descent to particulars goes. The basic example can be
constructed as the following obligational disputation between Socrates and
Plato (it is assumed that no man is running):
In this disputation, the respondent is given the duty to maintain as true
that every man is running. For this reason, he does not have to grant that
Socrates, his opponent, is running. The moral of the story is that 'every' does
not alone allow us to pick up any definite contingently existing singulars.
The moral of the story is illustrated further by reference to Caesar. The
anonymous author points out that in ancient Rome, the situation was the same
as in this disputation. The respondent would not have had to grant 'Caesar is
running' because of the positum 'every man is running'. However, with the
denial of Caesar's running follows the denial of his existence, given the
positum. The disputation thus strives to make it clear that in some manner
'every' allows descent to singulars only when existence is guaranteed.
D2
Po Every man is running
Prl Every man exists
Pr2 Socrates is running
Pr3 Caesar is running
Pr4 Caesar exists
Accepted, possible
Granted, necessary
Denied, irrelevant and false
Denied, irrelevant and false
Denied, repugnant (Po, Prl, Pr3)
Obligations as Thought Experiments 87
The result is that qualifications are needed for descent to singulars. This
is emphasized by a new variation of the example. The new variation works as a
discussion of whether (Po2) 'every man exists and none of these exists'
(indicating all men) is possible as a positum. The problem is important for
fourteenth century theory of supposition, since the standard descent to
singulars was of the form "every man exists, therefore, this exists and this
exists etc." (indicating all men). If Po2 is judged to be conceptually possible,
the conceptual necessity of the standard descent to singulars is
straightforwardly refuted.
The anonymous author points out two cases where we are to take both
parts of the conjunctive Po2 as true. First, if the sentences occurred in the time
of Caesar, 'these' indicated the men existing at that time. Then the latter
conjunct was naturally false. However, in this reading both conjuncts are true
now, if their signification remains the same, because no contemporary of
Caesar lives any more. Second, we can read the conjuncts with reference to
presently existing men. After all present men have died, the conjuncts will be
true, in this reading.
There seems to be no doubt that (Po2) 'every man exists and none of
these exists' (indicating all men) is possible as a positum. The anonymous
author concludes his example with the following crucial remark:12
"And from 'Every man exists' it does not follow that any of these
exists, because hereafter it will be the case that the antecedent is true and the
consequent false—e.g., after the destruction of those indicated."
As I read this conclusion, it requires careful formulation for the descent to
singulars, as developed in the theory of supposition. Careless formulations will
result in invalid reasoning, the anonymous author points out.
In short, the example starts with an obligational disputation, and ends up
with a theoretical remark in the field of the logical theory of supposition. At
least in my reading, the example offers us a model of how obligations can serve
purposes of philosophical investigation.
Let me now summarize what happens in this example in order to form a
generalized theory of obligational disputations as thought experiments.
Following three parts seem to give the logical core of what happens:
I. A particular putative theory is attacked. (In the above case the issue is
the logical theory of suppositional descent to particulars, formulated as a
rule of inference.)
88 Mikko Yrjonsuuri
II. A possible positum is presented. (Its possibility is one locus where the
thought experiment can be re-evaluated in order to defend the putative
theory. Here its possibility is clear in the first example. In the modified
version it is the main point.)
III. The opponent tries to develop disputation so that the respondent is
lead into inconsistent answers if she applies the putative theory. Rejecting
the theory should allow consistent answers. (The correctness of the
answers throughout the sequence may afterwards be re-evaluated in order
to defend the putative theory. The opponent, on the other hand, is free in
his choice of questions, and thus it is not possible to attack the selection
and order of questions.)
One way of getting hand on the simplicity and strength of this technique
is to recall the disputational practice. In order to attack a putative philosophical
theory, the opponent figures out an assumption and a sequence of sentences
that cannot be evaluated without paradoxes, if the respondent sticks to the
putative theory. It is also of some importance that the disputational setting gives
us representatives both for and against the theory. This may make the debate
lively.
The anonymous author does not explicitly tell that the aim of this example
is criticism of the theory of supposition. To defend my interpretation, I have
three points to account for this fact. First, the discussion of this example
finishes with a reference to an inferential connection that is clearly enough
connected to the theory of supposition. Second, the anonymous author is not
discussing theory of supposition, but theory of obligations. It makes no
difference which logical principle is attacked, since he is interested only in the
structure of the attack. Third and most important, it is a special strength of the
obligational technique that it allows attacking a philosophical theory so that the
defendant of the theory need not be conscious of which theory is attacked. This
makes the defense more impartial. With explicit knowledge of which principles
of inference are being attacked the respondent might take partial positions on
problems of "what follows formally" from the positum. This concept is
according to the anonymous author what obligational theory assumes.
It may also be remarked that for purposes of academic examinations13
it is
clearly especially fruitful if we have a technique of discussing philosophical
theories from the critical point of view without explicit introduction of the
theory.
Obligations as Thought Experiments 89
3. Obligations and Sophismata
In this section I consider some texts where obligational disputations are
connected to sophismata, which were an important working method of late
medieval philosophy, especially natural philosophy. My point is to show first
that some authors thought that sophismata are to be conceived as following the
obligational rules. Also, I will pick up an extremely simple example of using an
obligational disputation for philosophical purposes.
In general, the structure of the so called sophismata comes near to
modern understanding of how thought experiments work. There is a weird
situation, described by the casus, and a so called sophisma sentence, whose
interpretation and truth in the given situation seems problematic. Different
philosophical theories (in the considered subject matter) give different
evaluations to the sentence. To solve the problem, the most natural evaluation
must be pointed out, and the competing theories must be rejected.
One of the most interesting texts discussing obligations considered by
modern scholars is found in Richard Kilvington's Sophismata, in
sophism 47.1 4
It has been paid little attention that Kilvington comments on
obligational theory only in order to solve the sophism. Prima facie he has no
independent interest in obligational theory. The way in which he introduces his
revision of obligational rules makes it clear that he thought that the sophism is
to be evaluated through application of the obligational rules. He treats the casus
of sophism 47 as an obligational positum, and evaluates the sophisma sentence
as well as the arguments for and against as if they were put forward in an
obligational disputation.
Kilvington's main idea is that certain obligational rules (given by Burley,
for instance) for sentences technically called 'irrelevant' are such that they allow
no resolution of the opposing arguments of the sophism. Kilvington infers that
these rules must be revised and goes into discussion of obligational rules.
Substantially this sophism is concerned with epistemic logic, and it has
the uncomfortable feature that it looks as if Kilvington would claim that in some
cases certain sentences are both doubted and known. At least his view explicitly
implies that sometimes one must doubt whether one knows.
William Heytesbury rejected Kilvington's views of epistemic logic. In his
Regulae solvendi sophismata he rejects a variety of examples putatively
implying that some sentence is both known and doubted. Many of the examples
are clearly reminiscent of Kilvington's discussions.15
For my purposes, it is especially interesting to recognize that Heytesbury
rejects also Kilvington's revisions of obligational rules. He claims that it is
90 Mikko Yrjonsuuri
important to evaluate irrelevant sentences according to their actual truth values.
This claim cannot be interpreted except as a reinforcement of Burley's
obligational rule for irrelevant sentences. Many of Heytesbury's examples are
as well intelligible only as applications of Burley's theory of obligations.
Furthermore, in his De sensu composite* et diviso, he gives a short summary of
a Burley-type obligational theory.16
Kilvington and Heytesbury are rather important figures in the fourteenth
century English tradition of sophismata, and I think that we ought to take
seriously their claim that obligational rules regulate evaluations of sophismata.
Their discussion also bring attention to a feature of obligations that makes it
understandable that clearly obligational practices are not so overwhelming in
sophismata. (Parenthetically, it may be remarked that less clearly obligational
practices are abundant. Practically every sophisma employs the disputational
terminology of granting and denying, as well as the terminology of sequent and
repugnant propositions.)
It is the obligationally technical term 'irrelevant' which is at the heart of
Kilvington's and Heytesbury's comments on obligational theory. I think this
reveals an interesting fact. The specifically obligational issues are connected to
technically irrelevant sentences and their evaluation in disputations. One does
not need a special technique for granting what follows from an agreed
assumption, nor for denying what is repugnant with it. In this sense, it makes
no difference whether we call obligational those sophismata where these rules
are sufficient. Instead, agreed rules are needed for connecting the assumption to
statements which are logically distinct. These sentences are technically called
'irrelevant'. Their introduction to the disputation forces the question: how are
we to widen the assumption with actual facts?
In epistemic sophismata such connections are crucial, because the concept
of 'knowledge' has the curious feature of combining the domain of mind with
the domain of external reality. If we assume that you have certain beliefs and
certain justifications, it is a logically distinct and obligationally irrelevant issue
whether the reality is as you believe. Given this feature, it seems natural that the
obligational concept of irrelevance can be important in certain obligational
sophisms concerned with conditions of knowledge. This indeed is the issue
discussed by Kilvington and Heytesbury.
Space does not allow me to go deeper into the problem of irrelevant
sentences. Instead, let me take up a little example from Kilvington's sophism
47. In this example special obligational rules do not play any particular role, but
nevertheless Kilvington construes his thought experiment in an explicitly
obligational manner.
Obligations as Thought Experiments 91
At a particular step of Kilvington's lengthy argumentation in sophisma 47
he undertakes to refute the now so called Tarskian biconditionals.17
Kilvington
shows that from '/? is true' it does not follow that p by drawing attention to the
following little obligational disputation:
D3
Po 'You are a donkey' is true Accepted as positum; possible
Prl You are a donkey ?
Here the positum can be accepted as possible even if a man cannot be a
donkey, because the spoken string of sounds 'you are a donkey' might signify
something else, and thus could be true. Nevertheless, the respondent is a man
and he cannot be a donkey, and consequently Prl is impossible and cannot be
granted. But if we accept Tarskian biconditionals in the assumed formulation,
Prl follows from the positum, and must be granted.
If the criticized theory is allowed to be used as a principle of inference,
the respondent is in trouble in this disputation: he cannot answer satisfactorily.
Rejecting the criticized theory solves the problem: this is Kilvington's aim and
his interpretation of the disputation.
I need not take any position on whether Kilvington really succeeds,
because I am interested in the structure of the attack, not its content. In fact, I
think that Kilvington's attack on the so called Tarskian biconditionals is so
short that it is not even intended as a final discussion of the matter. He attacks
one specified formulation of the principle, and perhaps the best interpretation of
the attack is that the specified formulation is insufficient.
If we turn to William Heytesbury, we can now see that the general
strategy of his Regulae solvendi sophismata is interesting. In accordance to the
title, this text aims at giving logico-semantical rules. These rules aim at helping
the student in the disputations on sophisms. Such disputations formed an
important part of the curriculum of the arts faculty at Heytesbury's time.18
Most of Heytesbury's rules are inferential principles. For the most part,
he first gives them in a loose form, and introduces interesting qualifications
through discussing problematic examples reminiscent of standard sophisms.
Basically, in my reading Heytesbury employs the strategy of discussing his
rules through thought experiments in the obligational style, though in a
somewhat less technical format.
92 Mikko Yrjonsuuri
4. Conclusion
Thought experiments are also in modern philosophy often used to
construct counterexamples to suspectible philosophical theories. On the other
hand, many philosophical theories are expressible as inferential rules.
Therefore, counterexamples to suspectible rules of inference form an important
subclass of thought experiments.
In this sense, it is defensible that I limit my following concluding
discussion of how obligations can serve as a technique for constructing
counterexamples to criticism of rules of inference. I make the limitation mainly
because of clarity: this thesis is easier to explain and easier to defend than the
general thesis that they can serve as any kind of thought experiment. My
discussion in Yrjonsuuri 1994 considers the wider thesis. There I look at the
issue from the logical point of view. Here I concentrate more on the structures
of applying the technique.
My suggestion here gives, consequently, some depth to Paul of Venice's
late fourteenth century suggestion that "topic of obligationes is nothing other
than the topic of inferences presented in a more subtle manner."19
Paul's idea is
explicitly that of testing the respondent, but it does not seem impossible to
extend the idea to testing the inferential principles as well. If the respondent
knows how to lean on good inferential principles, he has to know also their
qualifications. My thesis is that at least for the early fourteenth century authors,
obligations were also a method of finding the exactly correct formulations of
inferential principles, not only a method of testing whether the respondent
knows them.
Above I discussed Kilvington's extremely simple obligational disputation
aiming at criticism of the Tarskian conditional 'if "p" is true, then p\ There the
positum was " 'you are a donkey' is true", and after this positum the opponent
put forward "you are a donkey". Schematically, the disputation works as
follows:
I. An inferential principle of the type 'p > q' is the philosophical theory
that is criticized.
II. A token of the antecedent p of this consequence is put forward as the
positum.
III. The corresponding consequent q of this consequence is put forward
to be evaluated. (The point is that it should be denied, but this means
providing a counterexample to the discussed philosophical theory. Thus,
it can be denied only if the theory is rejected.)
Obligations as Thought Experiments 93
The example is simple, and thus shows very clearly how to construct in
an obligational disputation a counterexample for an inferential principle.
Basically, the idea is to start with the antecendent and force the respondent to
deny the consequent or to grant its opposite.
Walter Burley gives as a useful rule for obligational disputations that it is
possible to prove anything that is compossible with the positum.20
In terms of
criticism of inferential principles this is exactly what we would wish. If an
inferential principle is valid, the opposite of the consequent is not compossible
with the antecedent.
Some modern scholars have interpreted obligations in terms of some
kinds of subjunctive conditionals. Burley's rule allowing anything compossible
to be proved comes as a problem to such an interpretation. There hardly is any
ordinary language conditional which would allow as consequent any sentence
compossible with the antecedent regardless of whether there is any (real or
putative) logical connection, even if there are some conditionals designed to
deny the existence of such connection.21
It has been clear for some time to most modern scholars that Paul Spade's
suggestion22
that obligations are a theory of 'would'-conditionals is untenable
as such. There simply is no guarantee that if the positum were true, the case
would be as the sentences granted in the disputation tell. Often the opposite is
true.
Christopher Martin has modified the interpretation into an interesting
direction. His idea is that obligations give a theory of 'might'-conditionals.23
Burley's useful rule telling that anything compossible can be proved is
interesting in respect to this interpretation. It seems acceptable that anything
compossible with the positum might be the case, if the positum is true.
My interpretation of obligations as thought experiments is to some extent
consistent with Martin's idea. Especially if we look at obligational disputations
as constructing counterexamples to putatively valid principles of inference.
Basically, it is rather natural to attack an entailment 'if p, then q' by pointing
out that 'if p, it might not be the case that q.' Thus an obligational disputation
might be seen as aiming at a valid 'might'-conditional, if it is interpreted as a
thought experiment.
However, it is clear that generally the positum and granted sentences do
not form valid 'might'-conditionals. For directly relevant sentences this is clear.
It does not make sense to claim that if Socrates were standing, he might not be
sitting. Equally for irrelevant sentences, it is rather pointless to remark that if
Socrates were standing, Bill Clinton might be the president of the USA, unless
one wants to hide ones views into mysterious sentences.
94 Mikko Yrjonsuuri
There is a theoretical reason why evaluations of sentences in obligational
disputations are not connected to 'might'-conditionals, or to any other kind of
conditionals. In an obligational disputation relevant sentences are evaluated on
the basis of inferential considerations. Their interpretation comes only
retrospectively. They do not describe but construct a possible situation.
Irrelevant sentences, on the other hand, are evaluated on the basis of semantical
considerations based on the actual situation. The semantical background of the
positum and irrelevant sentences is consequently different. On the other hand,
no conditional makes sense with different semantics for the antecedent and for
the consequent.
Burley offers a beautiful example. In an obligational disputation where
the positum is any false sentence, it must in the absence of special reasons be
granted as irrelevant and true that the positum is false. On the other hand, no
true conditional can have as the consequent that the antecedent is false.
Notes
1
Burley 1963, pp. 34-35.
2 Paul of Venice 1988, pp. 2-21, esp. p. 11. This text also discusses different ways of
defining obligation. In her footnotes Ashworth gives ample references to other authors.
3
Burley 1963, p. 81.
4
Burley 1963, pp. 76-81. Cf. also Knuuttila 1993, pp. 190-196.
5
Burley 1963, p. 35.
6 See Yrjonsuuri 1993 for discussion and references.
7 Swyneshed's Obligationes is edited in Spade 1977.
8
Spade 1977, pp. 254-255.
9
Yrjonsuuri 1990, p. 654.
1 0
Yrjonsuuri 1993, pp. 319-321.
H Edited in Kretzmann and Stump 1985. For the quoted text, cf. pp. 251-252.
1 2
Kretzmann and Stump 1985, pp. 252-253.
1 3
See Perreiah 1984.
14 Kilvington 1990a and 1990b. For modern discussion, see e. g. Spade 1982; Stump 1989,
pp. 222-231; Yrjonsuuri 1994, pp. 108-127, and Kretzmann's commentary in Kilvington
1990b.
15 Heytesbury 1494 and 1988. I discuss Heytesbury more widely in Yrjonsuuri 1994,
pp. 138-144.
16 Heytesbury's De sensu composito et diviso is printed in Heytesbury 1494. See Ashworth
1993, pp. 385-386, and Stump 1989, pp. 237-239, for alternative discussions of
Heytesbury's theory.
1 7
Kilvington 1990a and 1990b, S47, passages (t)-(z).
Obligations as Thought Experiments 95
1 8
See Heytesbury's introduction to the work. Spade's translation is available in Heytesbury
1979. For a particularly illuminating discussion of how Heytesbury's 'rules' work, see
Murdoch 1979.
1 9
Paul of Venice 1988, pp. 32-33.
2 0
Burley 1963, p. 57; 1988, p. 391.
2
^ I am thankful to Calvin Normore for pointing out 'even if-conditionals to me.
2 2
See Spade 1982. Spade 1992 modifies the interpretation very much to the same direction
as I am defending.
2 3
Martin 1993.
References
Ashworth, E. Jennifer
1993 "Ralph Strode on Inconsistency in Obligational Disputations" in Jacobi 1993,
pp. 363-386.
Bos, Egbert P. (ed.)
1985 Medieval Semantics and Metaphysics, Artistarium Supplementa, vol. 2. Nijmegen:
Ingenium Publ.
Burley, Walter
1963 Tractatus de obligationibus, ed. R. Green, in The Logical Treatise 'De
obligationibus': An Introduction with Critical Texts of William of Sherwood (?) and
Walter Burley, Ph. D. Thesis, Louvain.
1988 Obligations (Selections), trans. N. Kretzmann and E. Stump, in Kretzmann and
Stump 1988, pp. 369-412.
Heytesbury, William
1494 Tractatus Gulielmi Hentisberi de sensu composito et diviso, Regualae eiusdem cum
Sophismatibus... Venice.
1979 On 'Insoluble' Sentences. Chapter One of his Rules for Solving Sophisms, trans.
with an introduction and study by Paul Spade, Medieval Sources in Translation,
vol. 21. Toronto: Pontificial Institute of Medieval Studies.
1988 The Verbs 'Know' and 'Doubt', trans. N. Kretzmann and E. Stump, in Kretzmann
and Stump 1988, pp. 435-475.
Jacobi, Klaus (ed.)
1993 Argumentationstheorie, Leiden: Brill.
Kilvington, Richard
1990a The Sophismata of Richard Kilvington, ed. N. Kretzmann and B. E. Kretzmann,
Auctores Britannici Medii Aevi, vol. XII, British Academy. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
1990b The Sophismata of Richard Kilvington, introduction, translation and commentary
by N. Kretzmann and B. E. Kretzmann. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
96 Mikko Yrjonsuuri
Knuuttila, Simo
1993 Modalities in Medieval Philosophy. London: Routledge.
Knuuttila, Simo; Tyorinoja, Reijo and Ebbesen, Sten (eds.)
1990 Knowledge and the Sciences in Medieval Philosophy. Helsinki: Publications of
Luther-Agricola Society (Series B 19).
Kretzmann, Norman and Stump, Eleanore
1985 "The Anonymous De arte obligatoria in Merton College MS. 306" in Bos 1985,
pp. 239-280.
1988 (eds.) Cambridge Translations of Medieval Philosophical Texts, vol. 1, Logic and
the Philosophy ofLanguage. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Martin, Christopher J.
1993 "Obligations and Liars" in Read 1993, pp. 357-381.
Murdoch, John
1979 "Prepositional Analysis in Fourteenth-Century Natural Philosophy" in Synthese
40, pp. 117-146.
Paul of Venice
1988 Logica Magna, Part II, Fascicule 8 [Tractatus De obligationibus], ed. with trans, and
notes E. J. Ashworth, Classical and Medieval Logic Texts, vol. 5, British Academy.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Perreiah, Alan R.
1984 "Logic Examinations in Padua circa 1400" in History of Education 13, pp. 85-103.
Read, Stephen (ed.)
1993 Sophisms in Medieval Logic and Grammar. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Spade, Paul
1977 "Roger Swyneshed's Obligationes: Edition and Comments" in Archives d'histoire
doctrinale et litteraire du moyen age 44, pp. 243-285.
1982 "Three Theories of Obligationes: Burley, Kilvington and Swyneshed on
Counterfactual Reasoning" in History and Philosophy of Logic 3, pp. 1-32.
1992 "If Obligationes were Counterfactuals" in Philosophical Topics 20, pp. 171-194.
Stump, Eleonore
1989 Dialectic and Its Place in the Development of Medieval Logic. Ithaca: Cornell
University Press.
Yrjonsuuri, Mikko
1990 "Obligationes, Sophismata and Oxford Calculators" in Knuuttila, Tyorinoja and
Ebbesen 1990, vol. II, pp. 645-654.
1993 "The Role of Casus in some Fourteenth Century Treatises on Sophismata and
Obligations" in Jacobi 1993, pp. 301-321.
1994 Obligationes: 14th Century Logic of Disputational Duties, Acta Philosophica
Fennica, vol. 55. Helsinki: Societas Philosophica Fennica.