Medieval Formal
Logic
Obligations, Insolubles
ami Consequences
edited bv
Mikko Yrjonsuuri
The New
Synthesc
Historical
Library
The New Synthese Historical Library
Texts and Studies in the History of Philosophy
V O L U M E 49
Managing Editor:
SIMO KNUUTTILA, University of Helsinki
Associate Editors:
DANIEL ELLIOT GARBER, University of Chicago
RICHARD SORABJI, University of London
Editorial Consultants:
JAN A . AERTSEN, Thomas-Institut, Universitdt zu Koln, Germany
ROGER ARIEW, Virginia Polytechnic Institute
E . JENNIFER ASHWORTH, University of Waterloo
MICHAEL AYERS, Wadham College, Oxford
GAIL FINE, Cornell University
R. J. HANKINSON, University of Texas
JAAKKO HINTIKKA, Boston University, Finnish Academy
PAUL HOFFMAN, University of California, Riverside
DAVID KONSTAN, Brown University
RICHARD H . KRAUT, Northwestern University, Evanston
ALAIN DE LIBERA, Ecole Pratique des Hautes Etudes, Sorbonne
JOHN E . MURDOCH, Harvard University
DAVID FATE NORTON, McGill University
LUCA OBERTELLO, Universita degli Studi di Genova
ELEONORE STUMP, St. Louis University
ALLEN WOOD, Cornell University
The titles published in this series are listed at the end of this volume.
MEDIEVAL FORMAL LOGIC
Obligations, Insolubles and Consequences
Edited by
M I K K O Y R J O N S U U R I
University of Jyvaskyta, Finland
and Academy of Finland,
Helsinki, Finland
KLUWER ACADEMIC PUBLISHERS
D O R D R E C H T / B O S T O N / L O N D O N
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
ISBN 0-7923-6674-3
Published by Kluwer Academic Publishers,
P.O. Box 17, 3300 AA Dordrecht, The Netherlands.
Sold and distributed in North, Central and South America
by Kluwer Academic Publishers,
101 Philip Drive, Norwell, MA 02061, U.S.A.
In all other countries, sold and distributed
by Kluwer Academic Publishers,
P.O. Box 322, 3300 AH Dordrecht, The Netherlands.
Printed on acid-free paper
All Rights Reserved
©2001 Kluwer Academic Publishers
No part of the material protected by this copyright notice may be reproduced or
utilized in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical,
including photocopying, recording or by any information storage and
retrieval system, without written permission from the copyright owner.
Printed in the Netherlands.
T A B L E O F C O N T E N T S
P R E F A C E v i i
P A R T I OBLIGATIONS A N D INSOLUBLES 1
M I K K O YRJONSUURI / Duties, Rules and Interpretations in
Obligational Disputations 3
H E N R I K L A G E R L U N D A N D ERIK J. OLSSON / Disputation and
Change of Belief—Burley's Theory of Obligationes as a
Theory of Belief Revision 3 5
CHRISTOPHER J. M A R T I N / Obligations and Liars 63
F A B I E N N E PIRONET / The Relations between Insolubles and
Obligations in Medieval Disputations 95
P A R T II C O N S E Q U E N C E S 115
PETER K I N G / Consequence as Inference: Mediaeval Proof
Theory 1300-1350 117
rVAN B O H / Consequence and Rules of Consequence in the PostOckham
Period 147
S T P E H E N R E A D / Self-reference and Validity Revisited 183
P A R T III TRANSLATIONS 197
A N O N Y M O U S / The Emmeran Treatise on False Positio 199
A N O N Y M O U S / The Emmeran Treatise on Impossible Positio 217
PSEUDO-SCOTUS / Questions on Aristotle's Prior Analytics
Opposite of the Consequent? 225
I N D E X OF N A M E S 235
v
P R E F A C E
One of the most important cornerstones of logic is the relation of
consequence. This relation is something that is supposed to obtain
between the premises and the conclusion of a valid inference. However,
spelling out this relation in any further detail has proved to be extremely
difficult. In fact, logicians of various times who have tried to provide
a comprehensive account of what an inference is have always found
themselves in serious difficulties.
The purpose of this book is to look more closely at medieval discussions
of inference. The authors of the various essays aim at bringing
the field of medieval logic closer to the concerns of contemporary
philosophers and logicians. Thus, although the papers do represent the
peak of present-day scholarship, they are not primarily designed to
further specialist research in medieval logic. Instead, the purposes of the
book follow from the present situation of medieval scholarship: historical
research has advanced quite quickly, but the general philosophical
audience still has rather outdated views of the medieval developments o f
philosophy in general and of logic in particular. A t present, there is a
need for presentations that bring the results of historical research to a
wider audience. This book is intended to serve such a purpose, and
accordingly it should also be suited to the needs of courses in the history
of logic. The essays are independent, but they are organized in a way
that should make their argumentation easy to follow.
As the case often is in historical research, one of the major problems
in our understanding of medieval logic derives from fundamental conceptual
differences. Most modern logicians have understood their subject
as something with close connections to mathematics. On the other hand,
medieval scholars often thought that the account of an inference is best
given against the framework of a disputation. Medieval university life
was strongly dependent on dialectical practices. Academic argumentation
and consequently, practically all intellectual reasoning was understood to
take place in contexts where someone is trying to convince another
person by presenting a sequence of sentences. Such a conception of logic
vii
viii P R E F A C E
was of course deeply embedded in the ancient tradition. Aristotle's
Topics, for example, put logic in the context of an encounter between an
opponent and a respondent. In this context, an inference became a
structure by which the opponent can force the respondent to accept
something because of what he has already granted to the opponent.
The topics covered by the papers in this collection can be defined
with reference to three genres of the so-called logica moderna arising in
the thirteenth century: obligationes, insolubilia and consequentiae. Part
one of this volume is dedicated to obligationes and insolubilia, while
part two concerns consequentiae. The third part provides three medieval
texts in translation. The two first ones belong together and provide an
early representative of the theory of obligationes. The last one is taken
from a commentary on Aristotle's Prior Analytics, but can be classified
into the genre of consequentiae because of its subject matter.
The paper by Mikko Yrjonsuuri provides a general historical survey o f
the medieval theories of obligationes. Although the name of the genre
of logic comes from the word obligatio (an obligation, or a duty), the
issues discussed have little to do with deontic logic. More accurately, the
genre can be described as a logical theory of a special kind of dialectical
encounter similar to that discussed by Aristotle in his Topics. The name
comes from the idea that in a disputation the respondent may be given
special duties that he or she must follow during the disputation. The
treatises on obligationes discuss the logical issues arising in such special
disputations. A t the focus of attention, we find the rules that the
respondent must follow in his answers during the disputation. In his
paper, Yrjonsuuri provides a systematic account of three main medieval
versions of such rules (by Walter Burley, Richard Kilvington and Roger
Swineshed), and gives some guidelines for the variety of interpretations
that seem possible for disputations following these rules.
In their paper, Henrik Lagerlund and Erik J. Olsson compare Walter
Burley's theory of obligations with certain modern techniques of beliefrevision.
This is not to say that Burley would have been aiming at the
systems that were successfully construed by modern logicians. Rather,
the comparison provides the modern reader with an intelligent way o f
looking at the logical structures employed in Burley's procedures. In
essence, the problems encountered and tackled both by Burley's theory
of obligationes and modern theories of belief revision concern the ways
in which formal inferential techniques can be applied to epistemic
contexts with the inherent aim of consistency.
P R E F A C E ix
Lagerlund and Olsson have used Walter Burley's Treatise on
obligations from 1302. Modern scholars have often taken it as the
paradigm example of an obligational treatise. It indeed seems that the set
of rules and practical tricks presented in Burley's text were rather widely
taken as the starting point in the fourteenth century. Further, Burley's
theory differs little in its essential features from the system presented in
the early thirteenth century anonymous text translated in this volume.
As Yrjonsuuri shows in his paper, Duns Scotus can be credited for a
central generally accepted revision of the standard approach, and
Richard Kilvington and Roger Swineshed provided two alternative
approaches to obligations. Nevertheless, it seems that for the most part
the central philosophical problems discussed in treatises on obligationes
can be tackled with reference to Burley's text.
The basic structure of obligational disputations resembled closely but
not completely the way in which Aristotle described dialectical
encounters in his Topics. This is of course no accident: Topics had a
strong effect on the formation of medieval logic. Nevertheless, it seems
equally clear that treatises on obligations developed certain themes o f
Aristotle's Topics in an original way not intended or thought about by
Aristotle. These themes are further discussed by Yrjonsuuri in his paper,
but let us here pay some attention to one specific development that
seems to have taken logicians actually outside the theory of
obligationes. It was connected to the Aristotelian idea that in all
disputations the opponent aims at forcing the respondent to grant a
contradiction. This may, of course, result from either of two mistakes.
Either the respondent has taken an incoherent position from the
beginning, or he defends his position badly. It seems that quite early in
the development of the theory of obligationes, a third and even more
problematic mistake was recognized. This was that the position from
which the respondent starts might be paradoxical.
If, for example, the respondent has as the positum "the positum is
false," he will be led into rather similar inconsistencies as those
encountered in the so-called liar's paradox. When the respondent is
asked whether the positum is true or false, he cannot give either answer.
Nonetheless, he may have to answer because of the general requirements
of the game. In medieval parlance, these paradoxes were called
insolubilia. Not all medieval solutions devised for them were dependent
on the obligational or even disputational context. Nevertheless, even in
such cases it pays to recognize the dialectical setting in which medieval
logicians worked.
X P R E F A C E
In her paper, Fabienne Pironet looks at William Heytesbury's ways o f
dealing with insolubilia. His solutions are strongly dependent on
disputational and obligational techniques, and thus they provide a good
vantage point from which to survey the ways in which the disputational
setting is relevant to the paradox. The relation between obligationes and
insolubilia is perhaps at its clearest in Heytesbury's text.
Christopher J. Martin's paper takes the reader further down to the
early stages of the medieval traditions of obligationes and insolubilia.
The primary aim of his paper is to reconstruct the early histories o f
these two logical genres in a more comprehensive way. A s Martin shows,
the origins of the medieval discussions of the Liar may be found within
the theory of obligationes. This, in turn, seems to come down from late
ancient discussions located at the borderlines of possibility and
conceptual imaginability.
Thus, the theory of obligations seems to have been developed in order
to treat problems connected with imaginability within disputational
contexts. A s Martin shows, early medieval authors developed many o f
their central logical concepts within such contexts. From his discussion
of obligationes, we achieve a better grasp of how early medieval
logicians dealt with concepts that have to do with how two or more
statements stand together—that is, concepts like consistency, cotenability
and compossibility. On the other hand, in Martin's discussion
of insolubilia we can see many interesting ways in which the medieval
conceptions of assertion (as distinct from mere utterance) were
developed against a disputational background, and in a technical sense
within the context of an obligational disputation.
The general aim of the papers of the second part, dedicated to
consequences, is to give the reader a grasp of the ways in which medieval
logicians explicitly tackled problems arising from the theory o f
inference. On the one hand, the papers give a picture of the historical
development in logic in the fourteenth century, which was the time
when medieval logic was at its peak. On the other hand, the papers cover
the field in a systematic sense: What is an inference? How is it related to
conditionals? What makes an inference valid? What is the role played by
logical form in inferences? Why did the medieval authors look at
inferences especially from an epistemic perspective?
Peter King takes up the distinction between conditionals and
inferences. It has been claimed that medieval logicians confused the two,
and thus their central concept of consequentia may be variously
translated into English as conditional or as inference. King has looked at
P R E F A C E xi
all the available texts from the crucial period 1300-1350, and argues
that in these texts the confusion is very rare and always insignificant
from the logical point of view. The important thing to come out of this
discussion is an interesting picture of the proof theories in the period
considered. According to King's conclusion, far from being confused with
conditionals, inferences were seen as the heart of logic in the fourteenth
century. Furthermore, King also rejects the idea that logic was
exclusively understood as a discipline concerned with formal validity. As
King sees it, as far as formal validity was considered, it was generally
taken as one specific kind of validity, and medieval logicians thought
that they must consider validity in general.
Some recent studies have suggested that epistemic or psychological
considerations were developed in the late Middle Ages to substitute for
attention to the formal properties of inferences when evaluating their
validity. If this is so, late medieval logic paved the way for Descartes'
criticism of scholastic logic and his idea of deduction as a chain of clear
and distinct intuitions.
Ivan Boh's paper tackles this problem in a systematic fashion. His
idea is to look closely at the epistemic, doxastic and disputational rules
given in treatises on consequences in the post-Ockham period. While
confirming the thesis that there was an interesting historical change in
the ways of describing the idea of validity, Boh also challenges the main
formulations of the thesis. Boh opposes the idea that there are
psychological overtones in the ways in which late fourteenth-century
authors defined the validity of inferences. As he sees it, the development
went into a more mentalistic direction without being straightforwardly
naturalistic in the psychologistic sense. According to Boh, such a
mentalistic approach can already be seen in John Buridan, who was
perhaps the most important logician of the early fourteenth century. He
was looking at inference from a mentalistic viewpoint although it is clear
that he was not in any interesting sense psychologistic in his discussion
of the validity of an inference. Indeed, he relied quite heavily on the
concept of logical form in his account of validity. Thus, the fourteenthcentury
"mentalistic turn" ought not to be understood as something
opposed to an approach based on formal considerations. Boh's
investigations make it clear that the main representatives of medieval
logic did not understand inference as obtaining between formulas, but
rather between conceptual representations of what is the case.
Stephen Read's paper tests an interesting hypothesis adopted by an
anonymous author from the early fourteenth century, who is usually
xii P R E F A C E
called Pseudo-Scotus. According to the hypothesis, the inferential
analogue of the Liar paradox (an argument inferring from a single
necessary premise that it itself is invalid) proves paradoxical to the socalled
classical account of validity. Pseudo-Scotus thought that the
paradox forced him to qualify his account of inferential validity: in his
discussion we can, in fact, see many central features of his conception o f
validity. Thus, Read's discussion also provides a look at how PseudoScotus
treated the concept of validity. This seems especially interesting
if the reader keeps in mind that Pseudo-Scotus was one of the most
elaborate late medieval logicians to lean on considerations of logical
form in the definition of validity. In this sense, Read's discussion also
sheds light on the debate treated by Boh.
The text used by Read is included in Question 10 of Pseudo-Scotus'
commentary on the Prior Analytics {Super librum primum et secundum
Priorum Analyticorum Aristotelis quaestiones), and it is provided here as
the third text of the Appendix. The text has traditionally been printed
in collections of Duns Scotus' works, but it is now well known that he is
not its author. For want of a better name, the author has been called
Pseudo-Scotus. In his paper, Read discusses who this Pseudo-Scotus might
have been and when he most probably wrote his commentary. He
concludes by dating the treatise into approximately two decades after
1331, which provides a rather definite post quern. As for finding out the
author's name, Read is more pessimistic than some other scholars: he
rejects the view that Pseudo-Scotus would have been John of Cornwall
and thus leaves us with no other name than Pseudo-Scotus. In any case,
several modern commentators have discussed his questions of the Prior
Analytics, and therefore they qualify as one central source for students o f
medieval logic.
The two first texts of the Appendix occur together in the manuscript
from which they originate. We know little about their author, and even
the dating of them in the early thirteenth century is considerably less
exact than is the case for Pseudo-Scotus. They have been known as the
'Emmeran' treatises because of their geographical origin since L . M . de
Rijk edited them in Vivarium (vol. 12/1974 and vol. 13/1975).
Together, these early treatises provide a simple but philosophically
elaborated picture of the rules and practices of different obligational
disputations. Yrjonsuuri and Martin discuss in their respective papers
these texts in further detail. A l l three texts have been translated by
Mikko Yrjonsuuri.
P A R T I
O B L I G A T I O N S A N D I N S O L U B L E S
M I K K O YRJONSUURI
D U T I E S , R U L E S A N D I N T E R P R E T A T I O N S
IN O B L I G A T I O N A L D I S P U T A T I O N S
A n obligational disputation, as it was known in the Middle Ages,
consisted basically of a sequence of propositions put forward by one
person, called the opponent, and evaluated by another person, called the
respondent. In the most typical variations of the technique, the sequence
would begin with a special proposition, called the positum. It was taken
as the starting point, which the rest of the sequence would develop. The
respondent had to accept the positum, i f it was free from contradictions.
Then he had to take into account in his later evaluations of the other
propositions that he must at any time during the disputation grant the
positum and anything following from it. The disputations were called
obligational precisely because the respondent would admit to such a
special duty or obligation to follow this procedure in his answers.1
In this paper, my main aim is to give a concise account of the main
versions of the rules given by medieval authors for these disputations,
and to discuss some general issues concerning the interpretations that
can be given to the philosophical content and idea of these disputations.
However, in order to be able to look at the obligational disputations
from a historically appropriate perspective, we must start with some
remarks about how medieval authors located obligational disputations
within the theory of disputations in general.
1. A R I S T O T E L I A N DISPUTATIONS
The medieval authors cite two passages from Aristotle as giving the
background of the obligational theory. One of them comes from the
Topics, and one from Prior Analytics. Book VIII of the Topics describes
a dialectical game, where some thesis is being questioned following a
dialectical process. In Topics VIII, 4 (159al5-24) Aristotle summarizes
the roles of the two players:2
3
M. Yrjonsuuri (ed.), Medieval Formal Logic 3-34.
© 2001 Kluwer Academic Publishers. Printed in the Netherlands.
4 M I K K O YRJONSUURI
The business of the questioner is so to develop the argument as to make the
answerer utter the most implausible of the necessary consequences of his thesis;
while that of the answerer is to make it appear that it is not he who is responsible
for the impossibility or paradox, but only his thesis.
As this text shows, in the Aristotelian game the questioner tries to lead
the answerer into embarrassment by developing arguments in opposition
to the defended thesis. In the standard medieval Latin translations,
Aristotle's questioner is called the opponens, and the answerer is called
the respondens. For the thesis, the Latin word is positum. These words
are also used in the technical texts on the obligational theory.
In Prior Analytics I, 13 (32al8-20) on the other hand, Aristotle
defines his terms as follows:3
I use the terms 'to be possible' and 'the possible' of that which is not necessary
but, being assumed, results in nothing impossible.
Aristotle's idea that from the possible nothing impossible follows has
played a major role in later discussions of possibility, even if his other
condition, that the possible is not necessary, has often been dismissed.
Here too, the terminological connection of the early Latin translations
to obligational theory is evident.4
As I see it, Aristotle's discussion of dialectical encounters in the
Topics provides an important background for the understanding o f
disputations assumed in the obligational theory. On the other hand, the
test of possibility suggested in the Prior Analytics seems to provide an
interesting way of looking at the import of the modal concepts. From
this viewpoint, the specific modal discussions that we find in the
obligational theory seem to have a basis in Aristotle. For an Aristotelien
background of the dialectical context, we have to turn to the Topics.
Aristotle's aim in Topics VIII was to give detailed advice on how to
behave in dialectical encounters having the form standard in Plato's
academy. These dialectical games proceeded through yes/no -questions,
which were selected and put forward by the opponent and answered by
the respondent. The idea of the game was that the answers were to be
used in an inferential manner. The respondent was defending a thesis,
and the opponent aimed at building an argument to refute the thesis.5
In Topics VIII, 5 Aristotle claims that no one has previously given
any articulate rules on how to proceed in co-operative disputations for
the purposes of inquiry. It is clear that Aristotle does not mean that he is
the first to give rules for dialectical disputations in general; his point in
the subsequent discussions is to develop a specific version of a standard
DUTIES, R U L E S A N D INTERPRETATIONS 5
technique. The rales for dialectical disputations with the purpose o f
inquiry are mainly aimed at the respondent, and only hints are given
about how the opponent should proceed. The basic idea of these rules is
to follow and evaluate the steps of a process of building an argument
against the thesis from premises which are more readily acceptable than
the conclusion aiumed at. Aristotle employs the idea that dialectics
proceeds from that which is better known towards that which is less well
known. It must always be the case that the respondent grants only what
is more acceptable than the conclusion aimed at; otherwise the
disputation could not provide real support for its conclusion. Aristotle
also enunciates the strange principle that if the opponent asks for
something irrelevant to the argument being constructed, the respondent
should grant it whether it is acceptable or not. He should just point out
the status of the question in order to avoid appearing foolish. The idea
behind such a rule seems to lie in the co-operative character of the game:
the respondent should grant the opponent whatever he is asked, i f it does
not lead to difficulties in defense of the thesis. Anything external to the
argumentation can therefore always be granted.
Aristotle's rales show how the disputational game can be characterized
rather as argument-seeking than directly truth-seeking. A co-operative
game cannot be aimed at deciding whether the opponent can beat the
respondent's defense, and therefore the aim cannot straightforwardly be
to decide the truth-value of the thesis. Rather, the point of the game is
in the search for the most interesting refutation of the disputed thesis.
Nevertheless, the game is closely bound to actual reality, and the search
for interesting arguments does not move freely in the logical space.
Granting individual steps in the argumentation is dependent on
acceptability in relation to the actual reality, and the idea of the
argument is to support the actual acceptability of the conclusion.
2. D I A L E C T I C A L DUTIES IN C O M M E N T A R I E S O N T H E TOPICS
The obligational technique as described in the beginning of my essay is
presented in a relatively clear form in some early thirteenth century
texts. For example, the Emmeran treatises translated in the appendix to
this volume contain rather full-fledged discussions of the rules of the
obligational disputations. However, the theory seems to be already at
this stage quite close to the refined form that we find in, for example,
Walter Burley's treatise from 1302. The early thirteenth century
authors must have been working with an already exisiting tradition.
6 M I K K O YRJONSUURI
Drawing a picture of the origins of the technique have proved difficult
for the moderns scholars. In his contribution below Christopher Martin
concentrates on this issue (see also Martin 1990). Martin does not pay
attention to Aristotle's Topics, although it may have influenced the
obligational technique already at the origins. He refers to other ancient
texts, such as Boethius's De hypotheticis syllogismis and Quomodo
substantiae. Partly this is because Martin concentrates on the features o f
obligational disputations that are connected to issues in modal theory.
It seems that early medieval theory of disputation developed with a
strong connection to the Topics? When we turn to the relatively
developed treatises of the obligational technique from the early
thirteenth century, such a disputational background is straightforwardly
assumed rather than discussed.7
The relation between obligations and the
Topics seems not to have raised much interest. However, in an
anonymous Parisian treatise on obligations from the second quarter o f
the thirteenth century (possibly by Nicholas of Paris) we find a
relatively clear statement to the effect that obligations lean on the
picture of disputations developed in the Topics but contain further
elements not considered by Aristotle (Braakhuis 1998).
It is not clear to modern scholars what the purpose of obligations
disputations originally was. It seems that they were used at least for the
purposes of exercise in the skills of logcial reasoning. Furthermore,
modern scholars have recognized that one of the most interesting
contexts where obligational technique occurs in the thirteenth century is
theological. Already in the early thirteenth century "Emmeran treatise
on impossible positio" (included in the Appendix) we find a theological
motivation for the discussion of an impossible assumption. The anonymous
author argues that because we can imagine God and man becoming
one—which has actually happened in Christ—we can also imagine a man
and a donkey becoming one, since humanity and donkeyhood are closer
to each other than divinity and humanity are to each other. The author
seems to think that the obligational technique is useful in discussing the
logical import of theological doctrines (De Rijk 1974, 117-118).
Towards the end of the Thirteenth Century, obligations are used,
among other contexts, also in a straightforwardly theological discussion
about the Trinitarian relations. In this context, obligational principles
are referred to as an aid of understanding how we are to understand the
ft *
divine persons. Here we need not go into these theological discussions.
For our interests here, it is enough to recognize the presence of the
DUTIES, R U L E S A N D INTERPRETATIONS 7
obligational technique as a philosophical tool that was used by several
authors in their search for a theologico-metaphysical problem.
Obligational disputations cannot be taken as straight descendants o f
the Aristotelian dialectical technique as presented in the Topics. Nevertheless,
it seems useful to look at their relations more closely. How was
the Aristotelian theory of disputation used in the theory of obligations?
In this respect, medieval commentaries on Topics might seem to be
the most interesting source. However, it turns out that few of the earliest
commentaries discuss book VIII of the Topics at all. Also, there is very
little modern work on the tradition, and few texts have been critically
edited. For these reasons, I have looked only at two easily accessible late
thirteenth century commentaries, by Albert the Great and by Boethius de
Dacia. Both connect ars obligatoria to some specific traits in Aristotle's
work.9
Let us look briefly at these two texts.
Boethius de Dacia's Quaestiones super librum Topicorum introduces
the obligational theory as a special technique to be used within the
context of dialectical disputations proceeding along the lines discussed i n
Topics VIII. In general, Boethius de Dacia accepts Aristotle's model o f
dialectical disputation. However, he makes a clear distinction between
sophistical or competitive disputations and dialectical or co-operative
disputations. He assumes that the purpose of Aristotle's On Sophistical
Refutations is to discuss the sophistical kind of disputation, while that o f
the Topics is to discuss only the co-operative kind. This makes much o f
Aristotle's advice in the first three books of the Topics problematic,
because much of it is based on techniques of concealment and
misguidance. How could such contentious means be applied in cooperative
disputations? Again and again, Boethius de Dacia stresses that
such means can indeed be used in some contexts. To explain their applicability
he refers to disputations used as an exercise, where the opponent
may use contentious methods in order to give the respondent exercise in
the quick recognition of inferential relations even in less easily
recognizable situations. (See esp. Boethius de Dacia 1976, 310-321.)
It may be of some interest to notice that Aristotle's methods o f
concealment are discussed in a genuinely contentious sense in a family o f
thirteenth century treatises discussed and edited by L . M . De Rijk in Die
mittelalterlichen Tractate De modo opponendi et respondendi (De Rijk
1980). In these treatises the advice given is clearly read as advice on how
to win a disputation, by fair means or foul. While Boethius de Dacia's
main problem is to show how co-operative disputants may use such
8 M I K K O YRJONSUURI
contentious methods, these treatises develop further Aristotle's ideas on
how to conceal the argumentation and how to mislead the respondent.
Aristotle mentions in Topics (VIII, 4, 159a23-24) two kinds o f
mistakes that the respondent can make:
For one may, no doubt, distinguish between the mistake of taking up a wrong
thesis to start with, and that of not maintaining it properly, when once taken up.
Boethius de Dacia understands the poor maintenance of the thesis as a
defense that allows the argument refuting the thesis to be built too easily.
In such a case, the argument does not achieve full credibility, either
because a problematic premise is granted or because a questionable step
of inference is allowed. Here Boethius follows Aristotle quite faithfully.
On the other hand, taking up a wrong thesis to be defended seems to
be treated quite differently by Boethius de Dacia and Aristotle. Aristotle
seems to have had in mind the competitive game and the problems o f
trying to defend an incredible thesis. Boethius de Dacia, for his part,
seems to have been ready to admit even an impossible thesis (provided
that it is not logically impossible), probably simply because Aristotle
himself allows the possibility of an implausible thesis in the next chapter
(VIII, 5, 159a38-159b2). According to Boethius de Dacia, anything that
can give grounds for a good exercise, or some kind of truth-seeking,
ought not to be called a wrong thesis. In many cases, it is clear that the
issue in the disputation is not the truth of the thesis, but rather just the
construction of the argumentation. Boethius de Dacia calls wrong only a
thesis that does not provide any basis for an interesting disputation.
Boethius de Dacia's example is the parity of the stars: there can be no
interesting arguments to show either that the number of stars is even or
that it is odd. (Boethius de Dacia 1976, 323-325.)
In general, Boethius de Dacia seems to take a step away from reality
in his discussion of Aristotle's rules. This step seems to show a crucial
difference between Aristotelian dialectical encounters and obligational
disputations. In an obligational disputation, the participants are not
interested in real facts in such a straightforward way as in the
Aristotelian dialectical encounters. However, before going on to the
obligational disputations proper, let us take a slightly closer look at
Boethius de Dacia's discussion of the duties of the respondent.
In order to clarify further what is to be understood as poor defense o f
the thesis, Boethius de Dacia discusses how the respondent should act in
the disputation. He gives a list of three requirements:1 0
DUTIES, R U L E S A N D INTERPRETATIONS 9
[1] A good respondent ought to be such that he grants to the
opponent all that he would grant for himself thinking by
himself, and [such that he] denies in the same way.
[2] He ought to be inclined from his inborn nature or from
acquired habit to grant truths and deny falsities and he ought
to love truth for its own sake.
[3] Third he ought to be aware that he should not be impudent,
that is, to hold to some thesis for which he has no reasons
and from which he cannot be turned away by any reason.
Such a person, namely, cannot come to understand the truth.
There seems to be no doubt that a useful truth-seeking disputation is possible
only i f the respondent meets these requirements. The respondent
must try to tell the truth, as is implied by [1] and [2]. If arguments do
not affect the views of the respondent, as is required by [3], the dispute
can make no progress in any interesting way. With obligational theory
in mind, it is useful to see [l]-[3] as basic dialectical duties, to be prima
facie followed in any dialectical encounter. In order to handle these
duties more conveniently, let us formulate formal analogues for them.
In this respect it seems suitable to join [1] and [2] into the analogous
duty according to which i f the respondent knows something to be true,
he ought to grant it to his opponent, if he is asked to. Similar duties
concerning denial and doubt can also be formulated. Formally these
duties can be stated as follows:
T a (p){{KrP & Rp) OCp)
T b {p){{Krp & Rp) ONp)
T c (p)(( -Kjy & -Krp & Rp) -> ODp)
(Ta is read: For any proposition p, i f the respondent r knows ('K') it, and
it is put forward ('R'), it must be granted (*OC). W stands for denying
and ' D ' for expressing doubt.) These duties can be characterized as the
general duty to follow truth. However, it is important to recognize that
they must be characterized as prima facie duties, which can be overridden
by other duties in certain disputational settings. A s it turns out, the
whole theory of obligations is concentrated on situations where these
duties are overridden to some extent by other special duties.
Boethius de Dacia's requirement [3] is connected to the idea o f
supplying reasons for one's beliefs. It can technically be expressed as the
idea that accepting p and the entailment n(p —> -<q) should have an
adverse effect on the defense of q. Accepting reasons for the opposite of
10 M I K K O YRJONSUURI
the thesis ought to make the respondent grant the opposite of the thesis.
With the theory of obligations in mind, it seems appropriate to
generalize: the respondent ought to grant, i f asked to, anything that he
knows to be entailed by anything that he has already granted. Such a duty
can be formalized as follows:
E (p)(q)((Cp & Kjn{p -> q) & Rq) -> OCq
(Without the deontic operator 'C/?' is comfortably read in the perfect
tense as 'p has been granted.')
It is noteworthy that in these dialectical duties the uncertainty
essentially connected with Aristotelian dialectical reasoning is almost
lost. Aristotle's concept of acceptability is replaced by the concept o f
knowledge, which implies truth and allows no uncertainty. Generally, the
respondent following Boethius de Dacia's rules for dialectical
disputations is, nevertheless, less bound by truth than the one following
Aristotle's rules. Boethius de Dacia places very clear emphasis on the
duty to be consistent and gives less weight to the duty to follow truth (E
has primacy over T a - T c ) . Especially in disputations designed as
exercises, the duty to seek the truth is almost completely overridden by
the duty to defend the thesis as well as possible. But a parallel overriding
of the duty to be consistent seems not to be allowed. A s Boethius de
Dacia points out, the respondent defending an impossible thesis may
grant falsities and impossibilities, but he may not grant anything that is
inconsistent (cf. Boethius de Dacia 1976, 328-329).
According to Boethius de Dacia, the truth is especially to be forgotten
in an obligatio, which he introduces as a special technique to be
employed in dialectical disputations:1 1
And with this you must know that in dialectical disputations, which are [undertaken]
for inquiry into truth, or for exercise in easy invention of arguments for
whatever proposition or in defense of the thesis, the art of obligations is often used.
Within the obligational technique developed by Boethius de Dacia after
this introductory clause, the respondent is given the duty to grant false,
even impossible propositions, provided only that they are consistent
(compossibilia). These propositions are called the posita. The
respondent is to grant whatever follows from the posita and deny
whatever is repugnant to them, regardless of truth value. The respondent
must also grant all propositions which neither follow from nor are
repugnant to the posita, again regardless of truth value. Boethius's rules
for obligational disputations were in certain respects different from those
DUTIES, R U L E S A N D INTERPRETATIONS 11
of the majority of authors, but it seems unnecessary to go into details
here. Rather, it suffices to point out that according to him all
propositions in an obligational disputation are to be evaluated regardless
of their truth values, solely on the basis of considerations of consistency.
In addition to Boethius of Dacia, Albert the Great's commentary on
Aristotle's Topics provides an interesting picture of the relation of the
obligational technique to Aristotelian dialectical encounters. Generally,
Albert's view seems to be similar to Boethius's, although as far as we can
derive obligational rules from his remarks, they seem to be closer to
what became the standard set in the fourteenth century than to
Boethius's rules. The most interesting passage is that in which Albert
gives a short description of the way in which the respondent should serve
his thesis. He writes that1 2
the way [of good defense] is to grant the consequences of the thesis (positum) and
deny incompatible [sentences]; from this arises the technique ofpositio falsa.
Albert understands the thesis to be something to which the respondent is
primarily committed. Consequently, he must grant whatever follows
from it and deny whatever is incompatible with it. This is one of the
general dialectical duties of the respondent, the duty of answering
logically. Furthermore, Albert connects this art to positio falsa, which is
a standard species of ars obligatoria.
Soon after this remark, Albert goes on to point out that in some kinds
of disputations the respondent always has to grant what seems to be true
(ea quae videntur esse vera; Albertus Magnus 1890, 506). Although this
general duty of answering truthfully is according to Albert important in
all disputations where the primary aim is to find out the truth, it is not as
widely applicable as the duty of answering logically, which is to be
followed in all disputations of whatever kind. Albert's discussion is an
interesting statement of the primacy of logic over truth in terms of what
can be defended in a disputation. Violations of logic are much worse than
violations of apparent truth. Albert introduces exercises as the most
obvious case of a situation in which one needs to be logical but not
truthful. The example is still valid, for textbooks of logic rarely stick to
true sentences in their examples and exercises. The point of these
exercises is not to discuss facts, but, as Albert says, to improve the
students' skills (ut perfsjpicaciores fiant; Albertus Magnus 1890, 506).
I think that Albert's remark that the duty of answering logically is the
origin of the technique of positio falsa is not accidental. Furthermore, it
seems quite clear that Albert would not give much weight to the duty t o
12 M I K K O YRJONSUURI
answer truthfully in an obligational disputation. Ars obligatoria is a
technique where the duty of answering logically is of foremost
importance, and the duty of answering truthfully is pushed into a corner.
This makes it a technique where the semantic interpretation o f
sentences is relatively unimportant, because the main issue is to study
inferential and syntactic relations between sentences.
3. W A L T E R B U R L E Y ' S R U L E S OF OBLIGATIONS
Modern scholars have generally accepted that Walter Burley's Treatise
on obligations (1302) can be treated as spelling out the standard form of
the medieval theory of obligations. This is not to say that the
majority of medieval authors would have agreed with all the details o f
Burley's presentation. Neither can we say that Burley was very original
in the composition of his treatise.1 4
Rather, it seems that the basic
structure of Burley's theory can serve as the paradigm against which
different versions of the technique can be looked at. In the following I
follow this practice. I first give a short presentation of Burley's theory.
After this, I sketch the two most discussed alternatives to Burley's
approach, which were presented by Richard Kilvington in his
Sophismata (between 1321-1326) and Roger Swyneshed in his
Obligationes (between 1330-1335).
In Burley's presentation, there are altogether six classes of obligation:
petitio, institutio, positio, depositio, dubitatio, and 'sit verum.,ls
O f these
six classes, Burley gives substantial attention only to institutio and
positio. Petitio ('demand') is treated as a general way of imposing any
obligation whatsoever on the respondent. Thus, in some cases the
obligations given are not even dialectical in any interesting sense. (Green
1963, 41-45; for translation see Burley 1988, 373-378). Also, Burley's
discussion of the class of obligations called "sit verum' ('let it be true')
shows that he did not think that any technical rules could be given for it.
The idea in this class was that the respondent should behave is i f he knew
some sentence to be true (Green 1963, 94-96). A s a class of obligations,
it is interesting mainly in comparison to the paradigmatic class, which is
positio. In this class, the respondent is given the duty to treat a certain
proposition, called the positum, as true—that is, to grant it whenever
put forward during the disputation. Nevertheless, in positio the
respondent does not pretend to know that his positum is true. Rather, it
is often made clear in the disputation that the positum is not in fact true,
but only must be granted. The respondent may usually even grant the
DUTIES, R U L E S A N D INTERPRETATIONS 13
sentence 'the positum is false.' He is not committed to the truth of the
positum, but only to granting it in the disputation.1 6
The central role of the class called positio is emphasized by the fact
that two other species, depositio and dubitatio, can be derived from it. In
depositio, the respondent must deny a certain sentence, called the
deposition, and the resulting disputation can in its central features be
treated as a mirror image of a disputation of the class of positio. In
dubitatio, the respondent has duty to doubt—that is, refrain from
evaluating—a certain proposition, the dubitatum. The rules aim at
guaranteeing that the respondent does not make any evaluation that
would logically force him to make an evaluation of his dubitatum at a
18
later stage o f the disputation.
In Burley's treatment, institutio is a class of obligational disputation
where some linguistic expression is given a new meaning. Then
propositions containing this linguistic expression are evaluated in
accordance with the new meaning. Thus, i f ' A ' is given the meaning 'a
man is a donkey,' the respondent must deny ' A ' if it is put forward as a
proposition in the disputation. Burley uses the technique for the
construction of semantic paradoxes. His main interest in the class seems
to be in its usefulness for exploring how linguistic expressions can be used
to signify something.1 9
The basic idea of the most typical obligational technique {positio) is
that a certain sentence, which is given as the positum, must be
maintained as true in the disputation. In essence, this idea amounts to
constituting a limited exception to the general prima facie dialectical
duty of following the truth. The positum must be granted in the
disputation regardless of its truth value and it is indeed taken to be
typically false. Burley explains separately whether it makes sense to give
a true sentence as the positum,20
Burley's formulation of the very basic
first essential rule of obligational disputations in the class of positio is
the following:2 1
everything that is posited and put forward in the form of the positum during the
time of the positio must be granted.
Burley's rule contains two crucial qualifications. The first qualification is
that the positum must be put forward in the specific form in which it was
originally given. Burley's examples of the rule show that this
qualification is connected to the idea that the positum is the very
sentence mentioned in the actual speech act giving the obligation for the
respondent. If the positum is 'Marcus runs,' it does not follow that
14 M I K K O YRJONSUURI
'Tullius runs' should be granted, even i f Tullius is Marcus. In addition
to being posited, the sentence must be put forward during the time when
the positing is valid, that is, during the obligational disputation proper.
The rule can conveniently be formalized as follows:
Ri (p) {{Pp & Rp) OCp)
(To be read: for any sentence p, i f it is the positum ('P') and it is put
forward ('R'), ^ must be granted ('OC').) The quantifier (p) ranges over
sentences, as Burley's first qualification requires. The sentential operator
i
Pf
standing foru
i s the positum" must be understood so that it includes a
reference to the technical time of the disputation. Being a positum is
bound to a specific disputational exchange, outside of which the sentence
cannot be treated as a positum. The sentential operator t
O' is used as a
deontic operator. The sentence 'OCp' states that there is a norm to the
effect that p should be granted.
In the next rules Burley spells out the obligation to remain consistent
after accepting the usually false positum. Thus, while the first essential
rule overrides the general duty of following the truth, these rules spell
out the import of the general duty of answering logically without
allowing any exceptions. The kind of consistency that Burley has in his
mind in these rules requires them to guarantee that the accumulating set
of answers remains consistent. Thus, at each step of the disputation,
sentences possibly put forward at that step fall into three classes: those
that follow, those that are repugnant, and others, technically called
irrelevant. A t each step, the respondent naturally has to grant any one
of those sentences that follow. Burley decrees:2 4
Everything that follows from the positum must be granted. Everything that follows
from the positum either together with an already granted proposition (or
propositions), or together with the opposite of a proposition (or the opposites of
propositions) already correctly denied and known to be such, must be granted.
The two parts of the rule can be formalized as follows:
R 2 a ip){q) ((Pp &D(p-+q)& Rq) -> OCq)
R 2 b (P)(q)(r) ((Pp &Gq& D((p &q)^r)& Rr) OCr)
(R2 a is to be read: For any sentences p and q, if p is the positum, and p
entails q, and q is put forward, then q must be granted.) R 2 b introduces
the sentential operator G, which is quite complicated in order to avoid
even worse complications. 'Gq' states that q is a conjunction o f
sentences, which have either been granted or whose opposites have been
denied earlier in the same disputation.
DUTIES, R U L E S A N D INTERPRETATIONS 15
The rule for denying repugnant sentences is analogous:
Everything incompatible with the positum must be denied. Likewise, everything
incompatible with the positum together with an already granted proposition (or
propositions) or together with the opposite of a proposition (or the opposites of
propositions) already correctly denied and known to be such, must be denied.
The formalization is as well analogous:
Here i
OhP stands for 'must be denied.'
A t each step of disputation, when a sentence is put forward by the
opponent, it can be answered on the basis of rules R1-R3, i f it is logically
dependent on what has been maintained earlier in the disputation. For
other sentences (called irrelevant), Burley gives the following rules:
If it is irrelevant, it must be responded to on the basis of its own quality; and this
[means] on the basis of the quality it has relative to us. For example, if it is true
[and] known to be true, it should be granted. If it is false [and] known to be false,
it should be denied. If it is uncertain, one should respond by saying that one is in
doubt.
Since irrelevant sentences cannot be evaluated by the previous rules, by
the principle of keeping consistent, they are evaluated according to their
actual truth value as far as it is known—this is the quality Burley has in
mind. Thus in the case of irrelevant sentences the general principle of
following the truth is followed. Formally the rule for irrelevant sentences
can thus be represented as follows:
Here ' 0 D ' stands for 'it must be doubted whether,' and for 'the
respondent r knows that'.
The epistemic conditions included in these rules for irrelevant
sentences are less interesting than they may seem to be. It may seem
that these rules allow a way in which the results of the disputation may
depend on what the respondent knows about the world. However, the
majority of the examples in Burley's treatise, as in other treatises on
obligations, assume that knowledge of actual facts does not vary. The
opponent can easily predict the correct answers, since the only examples
where the respondent may show ignorance are cases where ignorance is
indubitable in the context (whether the king is seated, for example).
R3a
R3b
(p)(q) ((Pp &n(p^ -yj) & Rq) -+ ONq)
<P)(q)(r) ({Pp &Gq& n{(p &q)^ ~r) & Rr) -» ONr
(p) ({Ip & Krp & Rp) -> OCp)
(p) ((Ip & Krp & Rp) -> ONp)
ip) ((Ip & -Krp & --Krp & Rp) -> ODp)
16 M I K K O YRJONSUURI
Another feature of the interpretation Burley gives to the epistemic
conditions which undermines their importance, is the idea that a doubtful
answer has no consequences for the disputation. The respondent may
not grant what he has previously denied, and he may not deny what he
has previously granted. However, he may grant or deny what he has
doubted previously. First doubting and then denying does not count as
giving different answers to the same proposition. Thus a doubtful answer
looks like refraining from a response where sufficient basis for an
evaluation is missing. (See, e.g. Green 1963, 62; translation in Burley
1988, 397.)
In the formalization of rules R 2 and R 3 1 have consciously omitted the
epistemic conditions given by Burley, although these conditions may be
found interesting, i f studied systematically. In his formulations of the
rules Burley says that a sentence must be granted, if it is known to
follow, and denied, i f it is known to be repugnant. M y reason for
omitting these epistemic conditions is that it does not seem clear that
Burley himself respects them in his applications of the rules. Often he
shows that a sentence is relevant by showing that it follows from earlier
granted sentences—without any explanation of whether the respondent
knows it to follow. In later treatments of obligational theory these
epistemic conditions are often simply omitted.
4. R I C H A R D K I L V I N G T O N ' S REVISION OF T H E T H E O R Y
It is not clear whether Richard Kilvington's discussion of the obligational
technique should be considered as a full-scale revision of the theory.
Kilvington's remarks are included in his Sophismata (written somewhere
between 1321-1326); and in the context it is clear that his main aim is
0 "7
not to consider obligational theory. The main aim of sophisma 47,
where the discussion is located, includes certain problems best
characterized as issues within the field of epistemic logic. It seems that
Kilvington thought that his method of solving the sophisma must
conform to the principles of obligations, but the theory as he found it
could not allow his sophisma to be solved. Thus, obligational principles
should be altered. This seems to be Kilvington's reason for going into a
substantial discussion of certain rules of obligations.
To begin his explicit discussion of obligations, Kilvington asks us to
consider the following example (I have included answers according to
Burley's rules):
DUTIES, R U L E S A N D INTERPRETATIONS 17
D l
Po
Pr,
You are in Rome
'You are in Rome' and
'you are a bishop' are
similar in truth-value
You are a bishop
Accepted, possible
P r 2
Granted, true and irrelevant
Granted, follows
Kilvington's example is connected to an idea that can be found from
many obligations treatises. According to a principle frequently discussed
it is possible to prove any falsehood compatible with the positum, i f the
positum is false. In this disputation the proposition P r 2 ("You are a
bishop") is proved although it lacks any connection to the positum.
Burley, for example, accepted the principle explicitly. The disputation is
also connected to another principle, according to which the order o f
presentation may effect the evaluations of sentences put forward.
Burley's rules of obligations would demand the respondent to deny P r 2 i f
it was put forward straight after the positum. A t that point, it would not
follow, and thus it should be judged irrelevant and false. Kilvington
rejects this principle explicitly, and thus it can be assumed that he does
not accept the reasoning. According to Kilvington, the answers of D l
contain three mistakes; two of them interest us here (see S47, (q)-(bb)).
First, Kilvington bluntly points out that the respondent should not
grant Prl i f he is not a bishop, since positing that he is in Rome should
not bind him to accepting anything more than i f he actually were in
Rome (see S47, (q)).
Second, i f it were the case that 'you are a bishop' should be granted as
Pr2 , the same should, according to Kilvington, already be granted at the
first step, i f it were put forward. Just as it follows at the step P r 2 from
the positum Po and the granted sentence Prj, at the first step it "follows
from the positum and from something else that is true and irrelevant."2 8
This remark is based on a technical distinction between granted sentences
and true sentences that have not been evaluated and are logically
irrelevant to the positum. Kilvington states that according to those who
hold the criticized view, a sentence following from something true and
irrelevant together with the positum should be granted just as a sentence
following from the positum and a granted sentence. A t this point,
Kilvington seems to be either misrepresenting the criticized theory, or
criticizing a theory that is unknown to modern scholars. Burley, for
example, was always careful to maintain a distinction between answered
and unanswered sentences.
18 M I K K O YRJONSUUR1
As I have already. mentioned, Kilvington states, without providing
good reasons for it, that the respondent should deny Prj in D l .
Kilvington's explanation is, unfortunately, confusing. To support his
view, he distinguishes two ways of using the word 'irrelevant.' The
'commonly assumed' way is that of Burley: a sentence is irrelevant i f it
neither follows from nor is repugnant to the positum together with
previously granted sentences and opposites of previously denied
sentences. The other way of using the term 'irrelevant' is such that it
also refers to a sentence, which
is true now and that would not be true in virtue of its being in fact as is signified
by the positum.30
By this phrase, Kilvington seems to mean sentences which neither
follow from the positum nor are repugnant to it, but whose truth-values
should be evaluated differently i f the positum is taken as a counterfactual
assumption. Kilvington thinks that such sentences should be denied. For
example, Prj in D l is such a sentence, and according to standard
obligational rules, it is irrelevant and true, but it must, as he claims, be
denied. His point is that it does not follow that i f a sentence is irrelevant
and true in the common sense, it must be granted. Kilvington thus rejects
the standard rule for irrelevant sentences.
As I see it, Kilvington is not trying to give a new definition o f
irrelevant propositions. He is satisfied with the standard idea that a
proposition is irrelevant i f it neither follows from or is incompatible
with the set of sentences determining relevance. Kilvington's concept o f
an irrelevant sentence covers the same class of sentences as Burley's
concept. Both authors can use the same definition. Instead, it seems that
Kilvington wants to change the way in which the truth values o f
irrelevant sentences are evaluated: their truth values are not to be read
from actual reality, but with respect to the situation that would obtain i f
the positum were true. This would not change the concept, but the way
in which the role of irrelevant propositions in obligational disputations is
conceived. In fact, Kilvington's theory makes the answers of an obligational
disputation reflect the counterfactual state of affairs that would
obtain i f the positum were true. Therefore, the alternative way of speaking
about irrelevant propositions suggested by Kilvington concerns their
evaluation in the disputation, not the extension of the term 'irrelevant'.
In terms of the disputation D l discussed above, Kilvington's revision
would thus amount to the following. The sentence P r t in D l is still
irrelevant, as it lacks any logically necessary connection to the positum,
DUTIES, R U L E S A N D INTERPRETATIONS 19
but we should not consider it as true, as it would not be true i f the
positum were true.
This kind of interpretation of Kilvington's obscure remarks receives
support from the fact that it makes rather easy to formulate
Kilvingtonian rules for obligational disputations so that they are not
altogether different from the standard rules. On my reading, Kilvington's
remarks can be interpreted simply as a slight but significant revision o f
the traditional theory of obligations. From this viewpoint, it seems that
he accepts the standard rules for the positum and for the sentences
following straight from the positum or repugnant to the positum alone.
Thus the following rules remain at the core of obligational theory:
Kilvington rejects Burley's rules R 2 b and R 3 b . This rejection implies that
a proposition will remain irrelevant at any step of the disputation i f it is
irrelevant at the first step. Kilvington's rules do not contain any
reference to earlier answers in the disputation, and consequently there is
no basis for giving a rule requiring attention to the order of propositions.
Kilvington's rules for irrelevant propositions are central. As Burley,
so also Kilvington evaluates irrelevant sentences according to their truth
values. However, he uses different truth values. His idea seems to be that
an irrelevant proposition is to be evaluated in accordance with its
counterfactual truth value, as far as this is known, and not according to
its actual truth value. Incorporating this idea, the rules for irrelevant
sentences become the following:
R*. (p)(q) {{PP &Iq& Kr(p ^q)8i Rq) -> OCq)
R4 bK
(p)(q) ((PaP SilqSc Kr(p -q) & Rq) -> ONq)
ipXq) ({PaP &Iq& ^K,(p D-^q) & ^K£p n^nq)&Rq)-+ ODq)
(Where (
p •—> q' is to be read as a subjunctive counterfactual
conditional.) From the systematic viewpoint it is interesting to notice
that, since any entailment is true as a subjunctive counterfactual
conditional, the rules for relevant sentences are redundant (some
assembly required, especially with the epistemic conditions). The whole
of Kilvington's theory can thus be compressed to the rule that the
counterfactual truth-values are to be followed, as far as they are known.
Rule R ^ is especially interesting. It is through this rule that
Kilvington is saved from the inconveniences attributed to him by Paul
Ri
R-3a
(p) ((PP & Rp) -> OCp)
(p)(q) ((Pp &D(p^q)& Rq) - OCq)
(p)(q) ((Pp &D(p^ -q) & Rq) -+ ONq)
20 M I K K O YRJONSUURI
Spade in his reconstruction of Kilvington's theory (Spade 1982, 27).
Intuitively, it seems acceptable that Kilvington's rules are exhaustive
and consistent, even i f proof of these features is impossible as long as
subjunctive counterfactual conditionals are not satisfactorily described.
The consistency of these rules follows from the idea that all answers are
related to one situation imagined on the ground of the positum. A
description of one situation ought to be consistent. The exhaustiveness
is achieved through R 4 c
K
, which allows a doubtful answer, i f some details
of the situation cannot be decided.
On the basis of these rules Kilvington's treatment of the disputation
D l becomes clear. Prj must in that disputation be denied as irrelevant
and false on the basis of R 4 b . It is irrelevant since it neither necessarily
follows from nor is repugnant with the positum. Furthermore, it is judged
false because its negation follows with a subjunctive counterfactual from
the positum. If the respondent were in Rome, 'you are in Rome' and
'you are a bishop' would not be similar in truth-value (unless the
respondent actually is a bishop). P r 2 is clearly irrelevant and false, and
thus it too is denied on the basis of R 4 b
K
. It may be remarked that the
claim that Pr2 is sequentially relevant is based on Burley's rule R 2 b , which
is rejected by Kilvington.
5. R O G E R SWINESHED'S RESPONSIO NOVA
In his treatise on obligations, written probably between 1330-1335,
Roger Swineshed formulated a remarkably loose rule about conjunctive
and disjunctive propositions:
Because the parts of a conjunction have been granted, the conjunction is not to be
granted, nor because a disjunction has been granted is any part of the disjunction to
be granted.
This rule has been much discussed both by medieval authors and by
modern commentators. The primary comment has been that this rule
allows the respondent to grant inconsistent sets of sentences. It is indeed
the case that through this rule Swineshed allows the respondent to grant
both parts of a conjunction and actually deny the conjunction.
According to Burley's rules, the only inconsistency allowed was among
propositions, which potentially were to be granted at a single step of the
disputation. A s only one proposition can be answered at each step,
inconsistencies within the set of actually given answers could not
33
occur.
DUTIES, R U L E S A N D INTERPRETATIONS 21
Swineshed himself accepts the conclusion that his rule makes the
respondent grant inconsistencies. A s he says:3 4
The conclusion is to be granted that three repugnant propositions must be granted,
and four and so forth.
However, some lines later he points out:3 5
This is true, but, however, no contradictory repugnant to the positum is granted
during the time of the obligation.
Swineshed's point seems to be that although the respondent's answers
may include inconsistencies, the status of the positum is not to be
questioned. Nothing inconsistent with it may be granted. This raises the
question: how are the inconsistencies limited? It seems that many
modern commentators have discontinued their work of interpretation as
soon as they have identified the source of the inconsistencies in
Swineshed's theory. But such an approach seems to underestimate the
merits of the theory (especially as Swineshed himself recognizes the
inconsistencies, and thinks that they can be limited). Let us therefore
spell out the rules of this theory in detail, and try to defend it.
Swineshed's point of departure is the standard conception of the
positum as something that must be maintained during the disputation
despite its falsity. He also agrees with other authors on the principle that
anything following from the positum is also to be granted. It seems that
the originalities in his theory derive from the following principle,
implied by Topics, VIII, 5, but not (to my knowledge) pointed out by any
3 6
other author writing on obligational theory:
Because of a lesser inconvenience (inconveniens) a major inconvenience is not to be
granted.
It seems that Swineshed attacks a principle accepted by Burley.
According to the principle a false positum may lead the respondent into
granting almost anything. This feature is due to rules R2 b and R 3 b , which
dictate that anything following from the positum together with what has
already been granted must be granted, and that anything repugnant to the
positum, together with what has been granted must be denied. These rules
allow those propositions, which have previously been judged irrelevant,
to have an effect on what becomes relevant. This leads to the feature of
Burley's theory that the order and selection of irrelevant propositions
put forward has an effect to the answers. Furthermore, this leads to a
situation in which, with a suitable selection of irrelevant propositions,
anything compatible with the positum has to be granted.
22 M I K K O YRJONSUURI
It seems that Swineshed's point in not allowing "a major inconvenience"
to be granted is that the assumption given as the positum should
not be unnecessarily widened, Swineshed simply rejects rules R 2 b and R 3 b ,
and redefines the concept of an irrelevant proposition accordingly, to
include all those propositions which neither follow from nor are repugnant
to the positum alone. The set of rules thus becomes the following:
R, (p) ((Pp & Rp) - OCp)
R 2 a (p)(q) ({PP &n(p-*q)& Rq) OCq)
R 3 a (P)(q) ((PP &u(p^ -q) & Rq) -> ONq)
R ^ (p) {{Ip & Krp & Rp) -> OCp)
R 4 b ip) ((Ip & Krp & Rp) ONp)
R4c (p) (Up&
^K
rP & -^K-rp & Rp) -> ODp)
(Here '//?' applies to all propositions p, which are not covered by the
rules R i , R 2 a or R 3 a . ) Swineshed's rules are merely a simplification o f
Burley's rules. From the formal viewpoint it is noteworthy that rejecting
R 2 b and R 3 b makes unnecessary the clumsy sentential operator ' G ' (true
of any conjunction of sentences which have been granted or whose
opposites have been denied). A l l answers can in principle be determined
without reference to earlier answers. Only the positum and the actual
reality must be taken into account.
In essence, these rules are the simplest and the most straightforward in
the tradition o f obligations. The respondent has a relatively easy task in
answering: he has to keep in mind, in addition to logical principles, only
the positum. N o complicated connections between the positum and
earlier answers need to be remembered, as they do in Burley's theory.
Irrelevant and relevant sentences need not even retrospectively be
connected to each other. Further, there is no need to consider counterfactual
states of affairs in a subjunctive way as in Kilvington's theory.
Irrelevant sentences are evaluated as the state of affairs actually is.
The price of this simplicity in answering is that the intelligibility o f
the set of answers is achieved only through two-column bookkeeping.
A n imagined bookkeeper attending an obligational disputation following
Swineshed's rules must separate relevant and irrelevant propositions into
different columns. Considered as one set, the answers may easily turn out
to be inconsistent, i f the positum is false. While contradictions may
occur between answers to relevant and irrelevant sentences, in both sets
consistency must be maintained in standard cases. Thus one may point
out that as anything following from the positum must be granted and
anything repugnant to it must be denied, similar rules of reasoning can be
DUTIES, R U L E S A N D INTERPRETATIONS 23
employed in the set of irrelevant sentences, as far as no change in the
actual world is reflected in the answers.
Historically it seems that Swineshed developed to a systematic end an
important motive present in many texts related to obligational theory.
In fact, Swineshed's rules for conjunctive and disjunctive propositions
are not completely novel, but have their predecessors in several texts,
including Walter Burley's treatise. It was already earlier quite explicitly
recognized that an obligational disputation combines the distinct
domains of assumption and fact. However, while the earlier rules o f
conjunctive propositions presented by, for example, Burley, concerned
sentences that would have to be granted at a certain stage of the
disputation, i f put forward, only Swineshed allows the respondent to
actually grant the parts of a conjunction but not the conjunction itself.
In Burley's model, the domains of assumption and fact are combined
into one coherent set of answers, but in Swineshed's model, they are
kept explicitly separate. This makes Swineshed's rules so different that
they deserve to be called the "responsio nova," as they indeed were in
treatises of obligations written after Swineshed.
Swineshed's two-columnar model of obligational disputations did
receive some support in the fourteenth century. A t about the time o f
Swineshed's Obligationes, Roger Rosetus attacks the standard rules o f
obligations along the same lines as Swineshed. The discussion is in an
epistemic context in his commentary on the Sentences?9
Robert Fland,
writing sometime between 1335 and 1370, presents Swineshed's rules o f
positio as a responsio nova, as an alternative to the responsio antiqua,
which is basically the model presented by Walter Burley (Spade 1980).
Richard Lavenham seems to have accepted Swineshed's model
unconditionally (Spade 1978).
It is noteworthy that while the early fourteenth century treatises on
obligations seem to have been related to Oxford, we do not know of any
obligations treatise that would originate from Paris between approximately
1250 and 1350. From the mid-fourteenth century Paris we have
the treatises by Albert of Saxony (Albertus de Saxonia 1975), William
Buser of Heusden and Marsilius of Inghen. A l l three treatises reject
Swineshed's responsio nova and favor rules more like Burley's rules.4 0
Towards the end of the century, Paul of Venice (see Paul of Venice
1988), Paul of Pergula (see Paul of Pergula 1961), and John of Holland
(see John of Holland 1985) advance a theory basically like Burley's.
This seems to be true also for the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries.4 1
It
appears that the authors took it to be important that all answers form
24 M I K K O YRJONSUURi
one consistent set, which can be understood as a description of a
situation. Swineshed's acceptance of inconsistencies between answers to
relevant and irrelevant sentences was seen to be more problematic than
the feature of Burley's theory that had provoked it; namely, that the
respondent may be led into granting almost anything.
6. P R O B L E M S OF INTERPRETATION
In the Prior Analytics I, 13 (32al8-20), as quoted above, Aristotle puts
forward the principle that from the possible nothing impossible follows
as a short definition of possibility. He does not dwell on the idea.
Nevertheless, the principle was well known in ancient and medieval
theories of modality. It seems that it also provides a good vantage point
from which to see many general issues in the interpretation of the
obligational disputations.
It is quite clear that obligational disputations provide a methodology
by which propositions can be assumed in order to see whether something
impossible follows. Through such a procedure, one can test in an
obligational disputation whether a sentence is possible. When a positum
has been laid down, the opponent aims at forcing the respondent to
grant a contradiction. If he succeeds, either the positum has been shown
to be inconsistent, or the respondent's defense inadequate. This seems,
indeed, to be one of the main motivations behind the development o f
the theory of obligations, at least in the thirteenth century.
There is one very interesting qualification that has to be made to this
picture. While Aristotle's principle denies that anything impossible may
follow, medieval scholars studying the theory of obligations soon noticed
that certain kinds of impossibilities typically do follow from possible
assumptions. This was, of course, due to the ways in which modal
concepts were usually understood in the thirteenth century. Among the
modal principles most often discussed in obligations treatises we find the
so-called 'necessity of the present' -principle: omne quod est, necesse
est, quando est. Within the theory of obligations, the idea has the
consequence that whenever the positum is false, the respondent must
connect it to some future instant of time. A s a rule, this means that he
must deny the presence of the present instant, i f it is referred to by a
proper name instead of the standard indexical expression (e.g., denying
l
A est,' where A names the present instant). Authors writing on
obligations soon noticed that the respondent has no convenient way o f
developing his answers, but can always be led into making answers that
DUTIES, R U L E S A N D INTERPRETATIONS 25
run counter to the 'necessity of the present' -principle. In effect, the
respondent may have to grant sentences that are in this sense impossible
whenever his positum is false, even when the actually false position is
clearly possible. This means, furthermore, a violation of Aristotle's
principle in the Prior Analytics that from the possible nothing
impossible follows. As is well known, Duns Scotus rejects the necessity of
the present. In his discussion of modality, he also refers to obligations,
and recommends leaving out the peculiar rule about instants of time. A s
Scotus points out, no other alterations follow i f this rule is omitted. His
suggestion seems to have been well received, since the rule in fact
disappeared from obligations treatises.42
On a more general view, the peculiar rule about instants of time seems
to be but one example of the predominance of consistency over
possibility as the aim that the respondent of an obligational disputation
strives for. It seems that authors writing on obligations were already in
the thirteenth century quite conscious of such a distinction between two
kinds of possibility. The Latin word compossibile was used to refer to a
more or less syntactic kind of modality based on non-contradiction. The
simpler concept possibile seems to pick out a somewhat different kind o f
modality based on considerations of the powers of agents or on
realization at some instant of time.4 3
A particularly interesting group of texts in which this distinction
seems to be especially visible are the thirteenth century treatises on the
type of positio in which the positum is impossible. Within these texts,
the authors readily admit that something impossible is admitted, so that
the respondent will still have to refrain from granting a contradiction.
For example, the early thirteenth century Emmeran treatise on
impossible positio allows the respondent to accept anything imaginable
as an impossible positum. He introduces the idea in a way that shows
close affinity to the Aristotelian idea of assuming a possibility in order
to see whether anything impossible follows.4 4
Just as we say that something possible must be conceded in order to see what
follows from it {quid inde sequitur), similarly we have it from Aristotle that
something impossible must be conceded in order to see what happens then {quid
inde accidal).
As the anonymous author develops the theory of the impossible positio,
it becomes very clear that the impossibility of the positum does not
allow the respondent to grant contradictory opposites. The author even
states this idea as a general principle:4 5
26 M I K K O YRJONSUURI
Thus, one must note that no obligation should be accepted which forces the
respondent to concede two contradictory opposites.
It seems that this principle can be taken as guiding all the different
versions of the theory of obligations. Whatever else is taken to happen
or to follow because of a false positum or some other kind of obligation,
contradictories may not be accepted. Given that in all disputations some
kind of deductive closure is intended, it appears that obligational
disputations can in general be characterized as procedures for
constructing consistent sets of propositions.4 6
It seems impossible to spell out semantic interpretations for the
consistent sets of sentences built up in obligational disputations. In an
important sense, the set of sentences is constructed regardless of any
interpretation, merely as a consistent set. However, i f we look at the
revisions of obligational theory proposed by Kilvington and Swineshed,
it appears that fourteenth-century scholars wanted to develop the
technique in a direction where the answers would form a more easily
intelligible whole. This aim also seems to underlie the revision suggested
by Duns Scotus to the peculiar rule about instants of time. After Scotus,
there was no reason to connect the various answers to different instants
of time. Such multiplicity would be quite impossible i f the set of the
answers were to be taken as forming a single semantic unity.
In an obligational disputation that follows Walter Burley's rules, any
semantic interpretation can be given only retrospectively. A n imagined
situation in which all the answers will be true cannot be identified during
an ongoing disputation. It would always be possible to select further propositions,
and to order them sequentially, in such a way as to ensure that
some of the correct answers would be false for the imagined situation.
This possibility is due to the feature of Burley's rules attacked by Richard
Kilvington. According to Burley's rules, the order in which the
propositions are put forward may make a difference to their evaluation.
Both Richard Kilvington and Roger Swineshed seem to intentionally
provide systems which provide for the possibility of a semantic
interpretation right from the beginning. Kilvington's way of achieving
this aim is to lean on subjunctive counterfactuals, while Swineshed leans
on the idea of keeping evaluations of irrelevant propositions explicitly
outside the part of the disputation based on the positum. In both cases,
the positum determines a possible situation, so that its determination
does not require the evaluation of later propositions. The subsequent
disputation can then be taken as merely describing the assumed situation
further.
DUTIES, R U L E S A N D INTERPRETATIONS 27
As I see it, the fact that the revisions of Kilvington and Swineshed
were not successful has a specific implication for the semantic
interpretation of obligational disputations. It seems that the medieval
authors did not think that it would be a problem that an interpretation
could be given only retrospectively. It thus seems that any
interpretation of the answers of an obligational disputation must comply
with such an approach. This seems to exclude the possibility of
interpreting obligations in terms of subjunctive counterfactual reasoning,
but leaves open many possible interpretations, from thought
experiments to belief revision models.4 7
University of Jyvaskyla
NOTES
1
There is no direct evidence that real obligational disputations would have been
conducted strictly following the rules. However, the medieval university life
contained many different kinds of disputations, and it seems reasonable to suppose
that the rules of obligations regulated at least some of them. See Perreiah 1984 for
a pragmatic interpretation of obligations and Weisheipl 1964 and Weisheipl 1966
for the role of obligations in medieval university curriculum at Oxford.
2
Translation is from Aristotle 1984, 268.
3
Boethius's translation (in Aristoteles latinus): "Dico autem contingere et
contingens quod, cum non sit necessarium, ponatur autem esse, non erit propter
hoc impossible." English translation is from Aristotle 1984.
4
Cf. also 34a25: "falso posito et non impossibili et quod accidit propter
positionem falsum erit et non impossibile."
For a modern discussion of the dialectical method presented in the Topics, see,
e.g., Moraux 1968, Brunschwig 1985, 31-40, and Kakkuri-Knuuttila 1990. Ryle
1965 gives a general picture of dialectic in the Academy.
6
See, e.g., texts edited in De Rijk 1967, esp. pp. 148; 556-558. Further, see pp.
611-612 for a discussion that connects some elements of the theory of obligations
rather straightforwardly to material found in the Topics.
7
De Rijk 1974, De Rijk, 1975. See also De Rijk 1976.
8
See esp. Henry of Ghent 1953, f. 92v; Godefroid de Fontaines 1914, 295
(Quodlibet VII, q. 4); Duns Scotus 1963, 135-138 (Lect. I, d. 11, q. 2, n. 23-28).
For discussion, see Knuuttila 1997 and Yrjonsuuri 2000.
9
Boethius de Dacia 1976, Albertus Magnus, 1890. N . J. Green-Pedersen has
looked at a large number of commentaries on the Topics and says that ars
obligatoria is seldom referred to. See Green-Pedersen 1984, 388. I have discussed
Boethius de Dacia in Yrjonsuuri 1993a and Albertus Magnus in Yrjonsuuri 1998.
"...bene respondents debet esse talis, quod concedat opponenti omnia, quae
concederet sibi ipsi secum cogitanti, et eodem modo negare. Debet ex naturali suo
28 M I K K O YRJONSUURI
ingenio vel ex habitu acquisito esse aptus ad concedendum veram et ad negandum
falsum et debet diligere propter se verum. Debet tertio cavere, ne sit protervus, id
est velle aliquam positionem, pro qua non habet rationem et a qua per nullam
rationem potest removeri. Talis enim ad cognitionem veritatis non potest
pervenire." Boethius de Dacia 1976, 321.
1
"Et cum hoc debes scire, quod in disputatione dialectica, quae est ad inquisitionem
veritatis vel ad exercitium in argumentis ad quodlibet propositum de facili
inveniendis sive ad sustinendum positionem, saepe attenditur ars obligatoria ... "
Boethius de Dacia 1976, 329.
1 2
"Modus autem iste est, ut consequentia ad positionem concedat, et repugnantia
neget: quod ex hoc oritur scientia falsae positionis." Albertus Magnus 1890, 505.
1 3
Critical edition in Green 1963; partial translation in Burley 1988. For
discussion, see D'Ors 1990; Spade 1982a; Spade 1982b; Stump 1982; Stump
1989, 195-213. My presentation here leans on Yrjonsuuri 1994, 36-63.
1 4
There is an anonymous treatise that has sometimes been attributed to William of
Sherwood (edition in Green 1963), and which has been argued to be written by
Burley himself (see Spade and Stump 1983). Whether the treatise has been written
by Burley or not, it seems clear that Burley's theory is not very much different
from the early thirteenth century treatises (see De Rijk 1974, De Rijk 1975,
Braakhuis 1998). It is also interesting to note that Ockham's discussion of
obligations is rather similar to that of Burley (see Ockham 1974, 731-744. Richter
1990 argues that the author of the discussion (whether it is Ockham or not) has
compiled the treatise straightforwardly from Burley's text. As I see it, there are
some important doctrinal differences. See also Stump 1989, 251-269.
1 5
For a more detailed discussion of the division, see Yrjonsuuri 1994, 38-43.
1 6
For further discussion, see Yrjonsuuri 1993b. See Knuuttila and Yrjonsuuri
1988; Yrjonsuuri 1994, 152-158 and D'Ors 1990 for arguments on this issue
directed at Stump 1982, 323-327 and Stump 1989, 382-383.
1 7
Green 1963, 84-89; translation Burley 1988, 404^08.
l g
Green 1963, 89-94; translation Burley 1988, 409^12.
1 9
Green 1963, 35-41; translation Burley 1988, 371-373.
2 0
"...ut contra protervientes, qui aliquando verum negant scitum esse verum; non
enim semper verum scitum esse verum habetur pro vero." Green 1963, 45; for
translation, see Burley 1988, 378.
21
"Omne positum, sub forma positi propositum, in tempore positionis, est
concedendum." Green 1963, 46. Translation in Burley 1988, 379.
2 2
"Et ponitur haec particula: sub forma positi propositum, quia si proponatur sub
alia forma quam sub forma positi, non oportet quod concedatur. Ut si Marcus et
Tullius sit nomina eiusdem, et ponatur Marcum currere, non oportet concedere
Tullium currere." Green 1963, 46. Translation in Burley 1988, 379.
2 3
Formalizations of this kind were first developed in Knuuttila and Yrjonsuuri
1988. For the logical background of the formalizations see also von Wright 1963.
2 4
"Omne sequens ex posito est concedendum. Omne sequens ex posito cum
concesso vel concessis, vel cum opposito bene negati vel oppositis bene
negatorum, scitum esse tale, est concedendum." Green 1963, 48. Translation in
Burley 1988, 381.
DUTIES, R U L E S A N D INTERPRETATIONS 29
2 5
"Omne repugnans posito est negandum. Similiter Omne repugnans posito cum
concesso vel concessis, vel opposite bene negati vel oppositis bene negatorum,
scitum esse tale, est negandum," Green 1963, 48. Translation in Burley 1988, 381.
2 6
"Si sit impertinens, respondendum est secundum sui qualitatem, ct hoc,
secundum qualitatem quam habet ad nos. Ut, si sit verum, scitum esse verum,
debet concedi. Si sit falsum, scitum esse falsum, debet negari. Si sit dubium,
respondendum est dubie." Green 1963, 48. Translation in Burley 1988, 381.
2 7
Critical edition in Kilvington 1990a and an English translation in Kilvington
1990b. Instead of page numbers, I use the passage codes to be found both in the
edition and in the translation. For the dating see the introduction in Kilvington
1990b. For discussion see D'Ors 1991a; Spade 1982a; Stump 1982. My discussion
here leans on Yrjonsuuri 1994, 102-144 and Yrjonsuuri 1996.
28
"...sequitur ex posito et alio vero impertinenti." S47, (r).
2 9
The anonymous treatise edited and translated in Kretzmann and Stump 1985
contains the rule that Kilvington has in mind here. In general, the treatise seems to
me, nevertheless, to come rather close to Kilvington's own approach. See
Yrjonsuuri 1994, 76-89; Spade 1993, 239-241; Ashworth 1993.
3 0
"...nunc est vera et quae non foret vera ex hoc quod ita foret a parte rei sicut
significatur per positum." S47, (cc).
3 1
"Propter concessionem partium copulativae non est copulativa concedenda nec
propter concessionem disjunctivae est aliqua pars ejus concedenda" Spade 1977,
257.
3 2
See Ashworth 1981; Ashworth 1996; D'Ors 1991b; Spade 1982a, Stump 1989,
215-249. My discussion here leans mainly on Yrjonsuuri 1994, 89-101,
3 3
For Burley's principles to this effect, see Green 1963, 58: "Ad primum dicitur
quod disiunctiva est concedenda ubi neutra pars est concedenda", and p. 59: "Ideo
dico aliter quod copulativa est neganda, et non solum ratione positi nec solum
ratione veri impertinentis, sed est neganda quia falsa et non sequens, et ideo est
neganda ratione utriusque; neutra tamen pars est neganda primo loco." Note also
that the issue comes up in Heytesbury 1988, 447-448. Stump has mistakenly read
there a view like Swineshed's model. Ashworth 1993, 385-386 and Yrjonsuuri
1994, 138—142 have corrected the mistake and shown that Heytesbury's idea of
obligational disputations is closer to Burley's approach than to Swineshed's model.
3 4
"Concedenda est conclusio quod tria repugnantia sunt concedenda et quattuor et
sic deinceps." Spade 1977, 274.
3 5
"Et hoc est verum dum tamen nullum contradictorium repugnans posito
concedatur infra tempus obligationis." Spade 1977, 274.
3 6
"Propter minus inconveniens non est maius inconveniens concedendum," Spade
1977, 253.
37
Swineshed's two-columnar model can also be compared to the idea of elaborating
the relations of two parallel disputations going on simultaneously. References to
such situations can be found in earlier treatises. See, e.g., Green 1963, 49;
translation Burley 1988, 382; Kilvington 1990a and 1990b, sophisma 47, passages
(j)-(n). A short systematic treatment of such a theme can be found in Richard of
Campsall 1968, 227-229 and 237-238; see also Knuuttila 1993b. Swineshed's
two-columnar model dividing relevant and irrelevant sentences into separate
domains, if not disputations, is a rather natural development of this theme.
30 M I K K O YRJONSUURI
Swineshed's Obligationes was written around 1330-1335 (Spade 1977, 246);
Rosetus's commentary on the Sentences around 1332-1337 (Courtenay 1987, 109).
3 9
Rosetus concludes: "Et ideo ista regula est neganda: sequitur ex posito et bene
concesso, ergo est concedendum, et multe alie regule que conceduntur ab aliquibus
in obligationibus." Rosetus manuscript, 36v (q. 1, a. 3, a. 3). I am thankful to Olli
Hallamaa for allowing me to see his edition in preparation.
4 0
See Braakhuis 1993, Kneepkens 1993 and Pozzi 1990.
4 1
For discussion of the later obligations treatises, see Ashworth 1985, Ashworth
1986, Ashworth 1992 and Ashworth 1993.
4 2
Duns Scotus 1963, 417-425; Ord. I, d. 38, pars 2. For discussion, see Knuuttila
1993a and Yrjonsuuri 1994, 64-75.
4 3
1 have discussed this theme more thoroughly in Yrjonsuuri 1998.
4 4
"Sicuti enim nos dicimus quod possibile est concedendum ut videatur quid inde
sequitur, similiter habemus ab Aristotile quod impossibile est concedendum ut
videtur quid inde accidat." De Rijk 1974, 117; translation below, p. 000. Cf. also
Aristotle's Prior Analytics, 34a25 as quoted above in footnote 3.
4 5
"Unde notandum quod nulla obligatio est recipienda que cogit respondentem
concedere duo contradictorie opposita." De Rijk 1974, 118; translation below, p.
000.
4 6
Swineshed's theory can be characterized in this manner, if irrelevant propositions
are understood as literally irrelevant and thus not included in the constructed
consistent set of propositions.
4 7
For discussion of how to interpret obligations, see also Angelelli 1970;
Ashworth 1981; Ashworth 1984; Brown 1966; King 1991; Knuuttila 1989;
Knuuttila 1997; Perreiah 1984; Spade 1982a; Spade 1982b; Spade 1992, Spade
1993; Stump 1982; Stump 1989. Ashworth 1994 is a rather complete bibliography
of both medieval obligations treatises and modern discussion of them.
REFERENCES
Albertus de Saxonia 1975. Tractatus de obligationibus, (in Sophismata, Parish,
Denis Roce, 1502), Facsimile edition Hildesheim, New York, Georg Olms.
Albertus Magnus 1890. Commentarii in Aristotelis Topiciis, (ed.) Borgnet, Opera
Omnia, vol. II, Paris, 233-524.
Angelelli, Ignacio, 1970. "The Techniques of Disputation in the History of Logic,"
Journal of Philosophy 67, 800-815.
Aristotle 1984. The Complete Works of Aristotle, (Bollingen series 71(2)),
Princeton, Princeton University Press.
Ashworth, E. J., 1981. "The problems of Relevance and Order in Obligational
Disputations: Some Late Fourteenth Century Views," Medioevo 7, 175-193.
Ashworth, E. J., 1984. "Inconsistency and Paradox in Medieval Disputations: A
Development of Some Hints in Ockham," Franciscan Studies 44, 129-139.
Ashworth, E. J., 1985. "English Obligationes Texts after Roger Swyneshed: The
Tracts beginning 'Obligatio est quaedam ars,'" in P. Osmund Lewry (ed.), The
Rise of British Logic, (Papers in Medieval Studies 7), Toronto, Pontificial
Institute of Medieval Studies, 309-333.
DUTIES, R U L E S A N D INTERPRETATIONS 31
Ashworth, E. J., 1986. "Renaissance Man as Logician: Josse Clichtove
(1472-1543) on Disputations," History and Philosophy of Logic 7, 15-29.
Ashworth, E. J., 1992. "The Obligationes of John Tarteys: Edition and Introduction,"
Documenti e studi sulla tradizione jilosofica medievale, III, 2, 653-703.
Ashworth, E. J., 1993. "Ralph Strode on Inconsistency in Obligational
Disputations," in K. Jacobi (ed.), Argumentationstheorie. Scholastische
Forschungen zu den logischen und semantischen Regeln korrekten Folgerns,
(Studien und Texte zur Geisteggeschichte des Mittelaterru, Bd. 38), Leiden,
E. J. Brill, 363-384.
Ashworth, E. J., 1994. "Obligationes Treatises: A Catalogue of Manuscripts,
Editions and Studies," Bulletin de philosophic medievale 36, 118-147.
Ashworth, E. J., 1996. "Autour des Obligationes de Roger Swynneshed: la nova
responsio," Les E,tudes philosophiques 3, 341-360.
Boethius de Dacia 1976. Quaestiones super librum Topicorum, (ed.) N. J. GreenPedersen
and J. Pinborg, (Corpus Philosophorum Danicorum Medii Aevi, vol.
6), Copenhagen, Gad.
Braakhuis, H. A. G., 1993. "Albert of Saxony's De obligationibus. Its place in the
Development of Fourteenth Century Obligational Theory," in K. Jacobi (ed.),
Argumentationstheorie. Scholastische Forschungen zu den logischen und
semantischen Regeln korrekten Folgerns, (Studien und Texte zur
Geisteggeschichte des Mittelaterny, Bd. 38), Leiden, E. J. Brill, 323-341.
Braakhuis, H. A. G., 1998. "Obligations in Early Thirteenth Century Paris: The
Obligationes of Nicholas of Paris (?)" Vivarium 36.
Brown, Mary Anthony, 1966. "The Role of the Tractatus de obligationibus in
Mediaeval Logic," Franciscan Studies 26, 26-55.
Brunschwig, J., 1985. "Aristotle on Arguments without Winners or Losers,"
Wissenschaftskolleg, Jahrbuch 1984/1985, 31^0.
Burley, Walter, 1988. Obligations (selections), transl. N . Kretzmann and E.
Stump, in The Cambridge Translations of Medieval Philosophical Texts:
Volume One: Logic and the Philosophy of Language, Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press, 369-412.
Courtenay, William J., 1987. Schools &, Scholars in Fourteenth Century England,
Princeton, N. J., Princeton University Press.
De Rijk, Lambertus Marie, 1967. Logica Modemorum: A contribution to the
history of early terminist logic, vol. II, part 2, (Wijsgerire teksten en studies,
16), Assen, Van Gorcum.
De Rijk, Lambertus Marie, 1974. "Some Thirteenth Century Tracts on the Game of
Obligation I," Vivarium 12, 94-123.
De Rijk, Lambertus Marie, 1975. "Some Thirteenth Century Tracts on the Game of
Obligation II," Vivarium 13, 22-54.
De Rijk, Lambertus Marie, 1976. "Some Thirteenth Century Tracts on the Game of
Obligation III," Vivarium 14, 26^9.
De Rijk, Lambertus Marie, 1980. Die mittelalterlichen Tractate De tnodo
opponendi et respondendi, (Beitrage zur Geschichte der Philosophic und
Theologie des Mittelalters, N. F., Bd. 17), Minister, Aschendorff.
D'Ors, Angel, 1990. "On Stump's Interpretation of Burley's De obligationibus," in
S. Knuuttila, R. Tyorinoja and S. Ebbesen (eds.), Knowledge and the Sciences
32 M I K K O YRJONSUURI
in Medieval Philosophy, (Publications of the Luther-Agricola Society, B: 19),
Helsinki, vol. II, 468^78.
D'Ors, Angel, 1991a. "Tu scis regem sedere (Kilvington, S47[48])," Anuario
Filosofico 24, 49-74.
D'Ors, Angel, 1991b. "Sobre las Obligationes de Richard Lavenham," Archives
d'histoire doctrinale et litteraire du moyen age 58, 253-278.
Duns Scotus, Johannes, 1963. Lectura in librum primum Sententiarum, in Opera
Omnia, vol. 17, (ed.) C. Balic et al, Vatican, Vatican Scotistic Commission.
Godefroid de Fontaines 1914. Quodlibets, vol. JV, (Les Philosophes Beiges,
Textes & Etudes), Louvain, Universite de Louvain.
Green, Romuald, 1963. The Logical Treatise 'De obligationibus': An Introduction
with Critical Texts of William of Sherwood (?) and Walter Burley, Ph. D.
Thesis, Louvain.
Green-Pedersen, Niels Jergen, 1984. The Tradition of the Topics in the Middle
Ages. The Commentaries on Aristotle's and Boethius' 'Topics,' (Analytica),
Munchen, Philosophia Verlag.
Henry of Ghent 1953. Summae questionum ordinariarum II (reprint of the 1520
edition), (Franciscan Institute Publications, Text Series no. 5), St Bonaventure,
N.Y., The Franciscan Institute.
Heytesbury, William, 1988. The Verbs 'Know' and 'Doubt,' transl. N . Kretzmann
and E. Stump, in The Cambridge Translations of Medieval Philosophical
Texts: Volume One: Logic and the Philosophy of Language, Cambridge,
Cambridge University Press, 435-475.
John of Holland 1985. Four Tracts on Logic, (ed.) E. P. Bos, (Artistarium, vol.
5), Nijmegen, Ingenium Publishers.
Kakkuri-Knuuttila, Marja-Liisa, 1990. "Dialogue Games in Aristotle," in M. Kusch
and H. Schroder (eds.), Text-Interpretation-Argumentation, Hamburg, Buske,
221-272.
Kilvington, Richard, 1990a. The Sophismata of Richard Kilvington, ed. N .
Kretzmann and B. E. Kretzmann, (Auctores Britannici Medii Aevi, vol. XH),
Oxford, British Academy, Oxford University Press.
Kilvington, Richard, 1990b. The Sophismata of Richard Kilvington, introduction,
translation and commentary by N. Kretzmann and B. E. Kretzmann, Cambridge,
Cambridge University Press.
King, Peter, 1991. "Mediaeval Thought-Experiments," in T. Horowitz and G. J.
Massey (eds.), Thought-Experiments in Science and Philosophy, Savage, M D ,
Rowman and Littlefield, 43-64.
Kneepkens, C. H., 1993. "Willem Buser of Heusden's Obligationes-Treatise 'Ob
rogatum': A ressourcement in the Doctrine of Logical Obligation?," in K. Jacobi
(ed.), Argumentationstheorie. Scholastische Forschungen zu den logischen und
semantischen Regeln korrekten Folgerns, (Studien und Texte zur
Geisteggeschichte des MittelatenLy, Bd. 38), Leiden, E. J. Brill, 343-362.
Knuuttila, Simo, 1989. "Modalities in Obligational Disputations," in Atti del
Convegno Internationale di Storia delta Logica, Le teorie delle Modalita,
Bologna, Clueb, 79-92.
Knuuttila, S., 1993a. Modalities in Medieval Philosophy, London, Routledge.
DUTIES, R U L E S A N D INTERPRETATIONS 33
Knuuttila, Simo, 1993b. "Trinitarian Sophisms in Robert HoUcot's Theology," in
S. Read (ed.), Sophisms in Medieval Logic and Grammar, (Nijhoff International
Philosophy Series 48), Dordrecht, Kluwer, 348-356.
Knuuttila, Simo, 1997. "Positio impossibilis in Medieval Discussions of the
Trinity," in C. Marmo (ed.), Vestigia, Imagines, Verba. Semiotics and Logic in
Medieval Theological Texts, Turnhout, Brepols, 277-288.
Knuuttila, S. and Yrjonsuuri, M . , 1988. ''Norms and Action in Obligational
Disputations," in O. Pluta (ed.), Die Philosophie im 14. und 15. Jahrhundert,
(Bochumer Studien zur Philosophie 10), Amsterdam, Griiner, 191-202.
Kretzmann, Norman, and Stump, Eleonore, 1985. "The Anonymous De arte
obligatoria in Merton College MS 306," in E. P. Bos (ed.), Medieval Semantics
and Metaphysics. Studies dedicated to L. M. de Rijk on the occasion of his 60th
birthday, (Artistarium Supplementa 2), Nijmegen, Ingenium Publishers,
239-280.
Martin, Christopher John, 1990. "The Logic of the Nominates, or, The Rise and
Fall of Impossible Positio" Vivarium 28, 110-126.
Moraux, P., 1968. "La joute dialectique d'apres le huitieme livre des Topiques," in
G. E. L. Owen (ed.), Aristotle on Dialectic, Proceedings of the Third
Symposium Aristotelicum, Oxford, Clarendon Press, 277-311.
Ockham, William, 1974. Summa Logicae, (eds.) P. Boehner, G. Gal, S. Brown,
Opera Philosophica, vol. I, St. Bonaventure, N. Y., The Franciscan Institute.
Paul of Pergula 1961. Logica and Tractatus de Sensu Composito et Diviso, (ed.)
Sister Mary Anthony Brown, St. Bonaventure, N. Y., The Franciscan Institute.
Paul of Venice 1988. Logica Magna, Part II, Fascicule 8, [Tractatus De
obligationibus], (ed. with transl. and notes) E. J. Ashworth, (Classical and
Medieval Logic Texts, vol. 5), Oxford, Oxford University Press.
Perreiah, Alan R., 1984. "Logic Examinations in Padua circa 1400," History of
Education 13, 85-103.
Pozzi, Lorenzo, 1990. La coerenza logica nella teoria medioevale delle
obbligazzioni: Con I'edizione del trattato "Obligationes" di Guglielmo Buser,
Parma, Edizioni Zara.
Richard of Campsall 1968. The Works of Richard of Campsall, vol. I: Quaestiones
super librum Priorum Analeticorum, (ed.) E. A. Synan, Toronto, Pontificial
Institute of Medieval Studies.
Richter, Vladimir, 1990. "Zu 'De obligationibus' in der Summa logicae" in W.
Vossenkuhl & R. Schonberger (eds.), Die Gegenwart Ockhams, V C H
Verlagsgesellschaft.
Ryle, Gilbert, 1965, "Dialectic in the Academy," in R. Bambrough (ed.), New
Essays on Plato and Aristotle, London, Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Spade, Paul V., 1977. "Roger Swyneshed's Obligationes: Edition and
Comments," Archives d'histoire doctrinale et litteraire du moyen age 44,
243-85.
Spade, Paul V , 1978. "Richard Lavenham's Obligationes," Rivista critica di
Storia delta Filosofia 33, 225-242.
Spade, Paul V., 1980. "Robert Fland's Obligationes: An Edition," Mediaeval
Studies 42, 41-60.
34 M I K K O YRJONSUURI
Spade, Paul V., 1982a. "Three Theories of Obligationes: Burley, Kilvington and
Swyneshed on Counterfactual Reasoning," History and Philosophy of Logic 3,
1-32.
Spade, Paul V., 1982b. "Obligations: Developments in the fourteenth century," in
N. Kretzmann, A. Kenny, J. Pinborg and E. Stump (eds.), The Cambridge
History of Later Medieval Philosophy from the Rediscovery of Aristotle to the
Disintegration of Scholasticism, 1100-1600, Cambridge, Cambridge University
Press, 335-341.
Spade, Paul V., 1992. "If Obligationes were Counterfactuals," in Philosophical
Topics 20, 171-188.
Spade, Paul V., 1993. "Opposing and Responding: a New Look at 'positio,'"
Medioevo 19, 233-270.
Spade, Paul V., and Stump, Eleonore, 1983. "Walter Burley and the Obligationes
Attributed to William of Sherwood," History and Philosophy of Logic 4, 9-26.
Stump, Eleonore, 1982. "Obligations: From the beginning to the Early Fourteenth
Century," in N . Kretzmann, A. Kenny, J. Pinborg and E. Stump (eds.), The
Cambridge History of Later Medieval Philosophy from the Rediscovery of
Aristotle to the Disintegration of Scholasticism, 1100-1600, Cambridge,
Cambridge University Press, 315-334.
Stump, Eleonore, 1989. Dialectic and its Place in the Development of Medieval
Logic, London, Cornell University Press.
Von Wright, Georg Henrik, 1963. Norm and Action, London, Routledge.
Weisheipl, James A., 1964. "Curriculum of the Faculty of Arts at Oxford in the
Early Fourteenth Century," Mediaeval Studies 26, 143-185.
Weisheipl, James A., 1966. "Developments in the Arts Curriculum at Oxford in
the Early Fourteenth Century," Mediaeval Studies 28, 151-175.
Yrjonsuuri, Mikko, 1993a. "Aristotle's Topics and Medieval Obligational
Disputations," Synthese 96, 59-82.
Yrjonsuuri, Mikko, 1993b. "The Role of Casus in some Fourteenth Century
Treatises on Sophismata and Obligations," in K. Jacobi (ed.), Argumentationstheorie.
Scholastische Forschungen zu den logischen und semantischen Regeln
korrekten Folgerns, (Studien und Texte zur Geisteggeschichte des Mittelaterns,
Bd. 38), Leiden/New York/Koln, E. J. Brill, 301-321.
Yrjonsuuri, Mikko, 1994. Obligationes: 14th Century Logic of Disputational Duties,
(Acta Philosophica Fennica 55), Helsinki, Societas Philosophica Fennica.
Yrjonsuuri, Mikko, 1996. "Obligations as Thought Experiments," in I. Angelelli
and M. Cerezo (eds.), Studies in the History of Logic, Berlin, Walter de Gruyter,
79-96.
Yrjonsuuri, Mikko, 1998. "The Compossibility of Impossibilities and Ars
Obligatoria" History and Philosophy of Logic 19, 235-248.
Yrjonsuuri, Mikko, 2000. "The trinity and positio impossibilis: Some remarks on
inconsistence," in G. Holmstrom-Hintikka (ed.), Medieval Philosophy and
Modern Times, (Synthese Library 288), Dordrecht, Kluwer, 59-68.
H E N R I K L A G E R L U N D & ERIK J. OLSSON
D I S P U T A T I O N A N D C H A N G E O F B E L I E F
B U R L E Y ' S T H E O R Y O F O B L I G A T I O N E S A S A T H E O R Y
O F B E L I E F R E V I S I O N
1. INTRODUCTION
As Paul V . Spade remarks "[t]here are many puzzles for historians o f
medieval logic" and "[o]ne of them concerns the peculiar form o f
disputation described in treatises de obligationibus." (Spade 1992, 171.)
In the present paper, we claim that the theory of obligationes as
presented by Walter Burley in the section de positione of his Treatise on
obligations can be seen as a theory of belief change.
On the surface there are many structural parallels between Burley's
theory of obligationes and the modern theory of belief revision. First o f
all, a disputation is a dynamic process driven by 'epistemic input' in the
form of incoming sentences to be incorporated into a larger body o f
sentences. Secondly, that the first sentence (the positum) in a
disputation should always be accepted corresponds to the so-called
success postulate in belief revision theory. Third, the central goal in both
frameworks is to avoid inconsistency, and, fourth, there is also an
inherent conservativity or minimal change principle at work in both
cases.
The paper starts in Section 2 by introducing Burley's theory o f
obligational disputation. In that section we also present a complete
formalization of this theory, a formalization which is faithful to the
dynamic nature of a disputation. In Section 3 we deal with the problem
of how to interpret Burley's theory. The standard formal theory o f
belief revision, the so-called A G M theory, is outlined in Section 4. In
Section 5 we show how to construct a belief revision operation from a
disputation. The belief revision interpretation is closely connected with
Paul V . Spade's counterfactual interpretation. The exact nature of the
connection is the topic of Section 6, where we consider the relation
between revision and conditionals and where our account is compared t o
that of Spade.
35
M. Yrjonsuuri (ed.), Medieval Formal Logic 35—62.
© 2001 Kluwer Academic Publishers. Printed in the Netherlands.
36 H E N R I K L A G E R L U N D & ERIK J. OLSSON
2. B U R L E Y O N O B L I G A T I O N A L DISPUTATION
In the English philosopher of the thirteenth century Walter Burley's
Treatise on obligation (Burley 1963) we find what was to become the
standard view on the subject know as the study of obligationes or
obligational disputation} A n obligational disputation involves two
persons: an opponent and a respondent. The role of the opponent is to
put forward sentences to the respondent, whereas the respondent should,
for each sentence put forward by the opponent, decide upon the
acceptability of that sentence in a way which guarantees that no
inconsistency is introduced into her gradually increasing set of accepted
sentences.
What actually constitutes the core of Burley's theory of obligational
disputation is a set of rules for how to start, proceed with and end the
disputation. A n obligational disputation starts with the opponent putting
forward an initial sentence, the positum:
Everything that is posited and put forward in the form of the positum during the
time of the positio must be granted.2
According to this rule, the respondent has an obligation to accept the
posited first sentence and consider it true throughout the disputation
(hence the name obligationes of this form of disputation). In short:
(Bl) The first proposition put forward by the opponent, the
positum, must be granted.
Let a be the positum. According to Burley's first rule, the initial set o f
sentences in the disputation should be D0= {a}. The sentences put
forward by the opponent following the positum will be denoted
ft, A, ....
The next rule is formulated as follows:
Everything that follows from the positum must be granted. Everything that follows
from the positum either together with an already granted proposition (or
propositions), or together with the opposite of a proposition (or the opposites of
propositions) already correctly denied and known to be such, must be granted.3
This rule stipulates what sentences should be granted given an existing
set of already granted sentences. Since the positum is among the granted
sentences (by Burley's first rule), Burley could have simplified his rule as
follows:
DISPUTATION A N D C H A N G E OF BELIEF 37
Everything that follows from an already granted proposition (or propositions) or
from the opposite of a proposition (or the opposites of propositions) already
correctly denied and known to be such must be granted.
In fact, Burley's rule admits of further simplification, if we are allowed
to make the reasonable assumption that to deny a proposition is the
same as to grant its negation.4
Furthermore, a useful idealization is to
assume that the respondent is logically omniscient, i.e. capable of
recognizing the logical consequences of what she believes.5
Given these
assumptions, Burley's second rule reduces to the following rule:
(B2) Everything proposed that follows from already granted
propositions must be granted.
Corresponding to this rule, there is a rule specifying what should be
denied.
Everything incompatible with the positum must be denied. Likewise, everything
incompatible with the positum together with an already granted proposition (or
propositions), or together with the opposite of a proposition (or the opposites of
propositions) already correctly denied and known to be such, must be denied.6
As before it seems safe to assume that to deny a sentence is the same as
to grant its opposite. B y the same kind of reasoning that led us to (B2),
we can justify a simplification of Burley's third rule:
(B3) Every sentence proposed whose negation follows from
already granted propositions must be denied.
A n equivalent formulation of (B3) is: the negation of every proposed
sentence whose negation follows from already granted sentences must be
granted.
Given a sequence (3Q, A> ••-> m e
rules (B2) and (B3) are used to update
the disputation set in the following way:
Di+l = D{ u {#•} i f p{ follows from Dh and
Di+l = Dt u {-$•} i f -tPi follows from £>,.
The second and third rules concern the case where the sentence proposed
by the opponent is relevant to the disputation set in the sense that
either the sentence itself or its negation follows from that set. In the
remaining case of an irrelevant sentence, the opponent should respond
in accordance with the following rule:
Everything proposed is either relevant or irrelevant. If it is irrelevant, it must be
responded to on the basis of its own quality; and this [means] on the basis of the
quality it has relative to us. For example, if it is true [and] known to be true, it
38 H E N R I K L A G E R L U N D & ERIK J. OLSSON
should be granted. If it is false [and] known to be false, it should be denied. If it is
uncertain, one should respond by saying that one is in doubt.7
The rule for irrelevant sentences is more complicated than the other
rules since it involves the respondent's background knowledge. A n
irrelevant proposition should, as Burley puts it, be evaluated "on the
basis of the quality it has relative to us," i.e. relative to what the
respondent thinks is true outside of the disputation. This is a clear
statement that irrelevant sentences should be evaluated epistemically, as
is the reference to "doubt" in the last sentence which also lends strong
support to that interpretation. It is therefore slightly confusing that
Burley also uses the expression "true [and] known to be true" indicating
an objective criterion (truth) against which irrelevant sentences should
be measured. But since the latter sentence is explicitly marked as an
exemplification of the main subjective idea, it is reasonable to conjecture
that Burley by "true [and] known to be true" meant just "believed and
that for (epistemically) good reasons." On that interpretation, the first
clause of the rule says that i f a sentence is justifiably believed, then it
should be granted, and the remaining two rules should be interpreted
accordingly.8
Hence, we end up with this interpretation of Burley's rule
for irrelevant sentences:
(B4) If a sentence is irrelevant to the disputation but the
respondent believes that it is true, then it should be granted;
if, under the same condition, it is believed to be false it should
be denied, and in the remaining case it should be doubted, i.e.
neither accepted nor denied.
Our purely epistemic interpretation of the irrelevance condition is not
uniquely supported by how Burley explains that rule, but it makes the
theory we ascribe to Burley more coherent than any other alternative
interpretation we are aware of, a claim to be substantiated as we proceed.
We can now add the following rules for how to update the disputation set
at stage i of the disputation:
Di+X = Dt u {Pi} i f neither $ nor its negation follows from Dh
but Pi follows from Kt i.e. the respondent's background beliefs,
Di+l = Dt u {—tpi} if neither pt nor its negation follows form
Dh but —tpi follows from K, and
Di+l = Dt if neither pt nor its negation follows from Dh nor
from K.
Let us combine the rules we have arrived at so far:
DISPUTATION A N D C H A N G E OF BELIEF 39
(i) A > = { « } ,
(ii) Di+l = D, u {A} i f
(a) A follows from Dh or
(b) neither A nor its negation follows from Dh but A follows
from K,
(iii) DM = D, u {-.A) i f
(a) —ipi follows from Dh or
(b) neither A nor its negation follows form Dh but -tA follows
from K, and
(iv) Di+i = Di if neither A n o r
its negation follows from Dh nor
from K.
Unfortunately, these rules are, as they stand, not formally satisfactory
from the point of view of modern sentential logic, since DiH is, in fact,
not well-defined: i f A is irrelevant to D ( but K is inconsistent, then both
(ii) and (iii) apply, since everything follows from a contradiction,
including A a n
^ ~~'A- To o u r
knowledge, Burley did not explicitly
comment on the case of the respondent entertaining inconsistent
background beliefs, and it is not evident what he would have said about
this case and its consequences for the course of the disputation.
However, i f we take rule (B4) at face value, it entails that both A a n
^
—iPi should be added at step /+1 in this case, since these sentences both
follow from K. Following this line, the amended version below represents
one reasonable solution to this problem of interpretation:
(i) D0={a],
(ii) D , + 1 - Di u {A} i f either
(a) A follows from Dh or
(b) neither A n o r
its negation follows from Dh but A follows
from a consistent Ky
(iii) Di+i = D{ u {—iA} if K is consistent and either
(a) —iA follows from Dh or
(b) neither A n o r
its negation follows form Dh but —iA
follows from a consistent K, and
(iv) Di+l = Dt u (A, —iA), i f neither A n o r
its negation follows
from Dh and K is inconsistent.
(v) £>I+i = Di otherwise.
Clause (iv) handles the case of an inconsistent background set of belief.
The only logical possibility not covered by the above rules for how to
update the disputation set, Dh is the case when Dt is inconsistent. Since
40 H E N R I K L A G E R L U N D & ERIK J. OLSSON
everything follows from an inconsistent set, we may define A+i to be
the set of all sentences in this limit case.
A very compact representation of a (Burley) disputation can be
obtained i f we enclose all relevant information about the disputation in a
set-theoretical structure. This is done in the following final definition.
Here we use a standard propositional language L and a corresponding
derivability relation to obtain a complete formalization.9
Definition: A Burley-disputation D is a quadruple D = <a, <A, K, D> such
that
(1) a is a sentence (the positum),
(2) <A is a linear ordering on A = {j30, A> p„, ...} c L (the
sentences put forward by the opponent after the positum, in
order of appearance),1 0
(3) K is a set of sentences (the background beliefs of the
respondent), and
(4) D is a set of sentences such that D = uDh where A is defined
inductively as follows:
(i) A> = {a};
(ii) i f A is inconsistent, then A+i = L; else A+i is defined by
(iii) -(v):
(iii) Di+l = A u {A} i f either
(a) A I- A, or
(b) A f Pi, Dt f^ph K Y Pi and K is consistent;
(iv) A+i = Di u {-A) ^ either
(a) A I- -Pi, or
(b) Di f ph Dt f^ph K I- -A a n
d K is consistent;
(v) A + i = A u (A, ^A} if A K A, A ^ A and # is inconsistent;
(vi) A+i=
Di otherwise.
The final disputation set, D above, which we shall call the outcome o f
the disputation, is the union of all disputation sets that are formed at
some point in the disputation.1 1
A n example of a Burley-disputation
might serve to make the idea behind Burley's construction more
accessible:
Example 1: Let a = 'Ronald Reagan (RR) is president of the U S , ' p =
'Nancy Reagan (NR) is married to Ronald Reagan,' y= 'Nancy Reagan is
the first lady.' Let K - {—.a, A oc&P~>y, —17} containing some expected
beliefs about the presidency of the US at the time when this paper was
DISPUTATION A N D C H A N G E OF BELIEF 41
written (1997). Consider the following disputation: D ] = <a, <A, K, D>
where A = {fiu P2, A lan
<* Pi =
P> Pi =
cc&p->Y&nd p3 = 7. Since a is the
positum, it should be accepted, i.e. D0 = {a}. The next sentence to be
considered is p. This sentence is independent of D0, but it follows from
K, so Di = {a, P). The next sentence is a&p->y, which says that i f RR is
the president and N R is married to RR, then N R is the first lady, which is
independent of Dx but follows from the background beliefs represented
by K. Consequently, D1 = {a, P, a&P—>y}. The last sentence to be
considered is % which follows from D2 and is added for that reason. Since
there are no more sentences to be evaluated, D = D 3 = {a, p, a&p—>y,
y). According to this set of propositions, Reagan is the president, Nancy
his wife and, being married to the president, also the first lady.
We have arrived at a precise formalization of Burley's abstract rules. But
the most important question remains to be answered: what purpose were
these rules designed to serve? This is the question to which we now turn.
3. T H E P R O B L E M O F INTERPRETING O B L I G A T I O N A L
D I S P U T A T I O N
There are two fundamentally different ways to interpret the theory of
obligational disputation. One might hold that the theory really describes
some kind of disputation involving two actual participants, but it is not
easy to see what purpose such a disputation could possibly have served,
and, moreover, there is no historical evidence of real disputations of this
kind having ever been conducted. For these reasons, several authors have
argued that the disputational setting is just a 'convenient fiction,' i.e.
that the disputation form is used to illuminate some other
phenomenon,1 2
although the opinions diverge as regards the exact
nature of this phenomenon. We shall in the following adopt a version of
the convenient fiction interpretation and argue that the 'opponent' is
indeed merely a fictitious entity.
The convenient fiction interpretation is not without problems of its
own, one having to do with the order of the sentences put forward by the
fictitious opponent. According to Burley, there are rules that do not
constitute the practice of the art of obligational disputation but are
merely useful. One such rule is that "[o]ne must pay special attention to
the order [of the propositions]"1 3
. It is exemplified as follows by Burley:
42 H E N R I K L A G E R L U N D & ERIK J. OLSSON
[S]uppose it is the case that Socrates and Plato are black, and let it be posited that
Socrates is white. Then if 'Socrates and Plato are alike' is proposed in first place, it
must be granted, because it is true and irrelevant. And if 'Plato is white' were
proposed after this, it would have to be granted, because it follows. If, however,
'Plato is white' were proposed in first place, it would have to be denied, because it
is false and irrelevant. If 'Socrates and Plato are alike' were proposed after this, it
would have to be denied because it is incompatible.14
Burley here describes two disputations differing only in the order in
which the sentences were proposed, yet leading to radically different
outcomes. Curiously, as Spade notices, Burley seems to be giving advice
rather than merely stating a fact about the behaviour of his rules.1 5
One
is under the impression that there is, according to Burley, one correct
ordering and that one has to be careful not to deviate from that ordering,
which raises the question which ordering Burley has in mind. In our view,
a reasonable interpretation of Burley's theory has to provide some kind
of answer to that question.
Note also how difficult it is to make sense of Burley's advice that one
must pay particular attention to the order i f one adopts a non-fictional
interpretation of Burley's theory. On such an interpretation the
respondent just has to face the ordering selected by the opponent, and
Burley's advice would seem pointless.
For another example of the effects of varying the order, an example
that makes use of sentential logic only, compare the following
disputation to that of Example 1 above:1 6
Example 2: Let a, (3, /and K be as in Example 1. Let D 2 = <a, <A, K, D>
where A = (A, /32 , ft} and ft = 7, ft = /3 and ft = a&p-yy. This
disputation differs from that of Example 1 only in that here the
sentence y is considered first, not last. Since a is the positum, it should
be accepted, i.e. .Do=
{#}• The next sentence to be considered is now y
which says that Nancy Reagan is the first lady. This sentence does not
follow from D0, but its negation follows from K, so Dx = {a, —17}. The
next sentence is ft which is accepted since it follows from K so that D2 =
{a,—i%P}. Finally, the negation of a&f3—>yis accepted since it follows
from D2. In this case, the outcome of the disputation is Z)3 = {a, ft —1%
—i(cc&(5—>Y)}. Notice that this set is quite different from the outcome of
the disputation in Example 1. The outcome is that Ronald Reagan is the
president and Nancy, though not the first lady, is Ronald's wife.
DISPUTATION A N D C H A N G E OF BELIEF 43
Notice the slightly odd outcome of Example 2, a feature we will return
to in Section 5. The problem with the ordering, its nature and origin, is a
genuine problem for the convenient fiction interpretation, including our
own interpretation.1 7
We will argue that Burley is really trying to provide a theory of how
an agent, the respondent in the disputation, should revise her beliefs in
the light of the new information represented by the positum. The idea is
quite evident from Example 1 and 2; the two different results of these
disputations can be interpreted as two possible cognitive responses to the
new information that, contrary to what we believed, Reagan, and not
Clinton, is the president of the United States. It will prove useful to refer
to the modern discussion on the subject of belief revision, and in the
next section we outline the relevant aspects of contemporary theories of
belief revision, concentrating on what has become the standard theory:
the A G M theory of Alchourron, Gardenfors and Makinson.
4. T H E A G M T H E O R Y OF BELIEF REVISION
In the A G M theory a belief state is represented as a logically closed sets
of sentences (called a belief set). There are three principal types o f
belief change: expansion, revision and contraction. In expansion, a new
belief is added without any old belief being given up. In revision, the new
information is added in a way that preserves consistency. Even i f the
new information is inconsistent with the original belief set, revision
guarantees that the new belief set is consistent (provided that the new
information is non-contradictory). Finally, to contract a belief means to
remove it from the belief set. Expansion of a belief set AT by a sentence
a, denoted K+cc, is the simplest of the three operations and is defined as
the logical closure of the union of K and {a}. Hence, K+a = Cn(K u
{oc}). Closing under logical consequence ensures that the result o f
expansion is a new belief set.
According to the A G M trio, a reasonable revision operation should at
least satisfy the following so-called basic revision postulates:
( K * l ) K*a= Cn(K* a).
(K*2) ae K*a.
(K*3) K*ccczCn(KKj {a}).
(K*4) I f - a e K, then Cn(A:u {a})czK*a.
(K*5) / ^ c ^ ^ i f a n d only i f
(K*6) If h a <-> A then K*cc = K*fi.
44 H E N R I K L A G E R L U N D & ERIK J. OLSSON
The first postulate says that the result of revision should be a logically
closed set. According to the second postulate, the sentence a should be
believed after the revision of K by a. This postulate is known as the
success postulate. The postulates (K*3) and (K*4) together express,
essentially, that the revision of K by a be identified with the expansion
of K by a i f a is consistent with K. The meaning of (K*5) is that K*a is
consistent unless a is contradictory. Finally, (K*6) says that logically
equivalent input sentences should give rise to identical revised states.
According to Gardenfors, the purpose of the revision postulates is to
capture the intuition that revisions should be, in a sense, minimal
changes so that information is not lost, or gained, without compelling
reasons. Gardenfors is here appealing to a principle of informational
economy. As he puts it, "the main trust of the criterion o f
informational economy is that the revision of a belief set not be greater
than what is necessary in order to accept the epistemic input."1 9
O f the
six basic postulates, only (K*3) and (K*4) seem directly related to the
principle of minimal change. According to (K*3), K*a must not contain
more information than what is included in Cn(K u {oc}), whereas (K*4)
stipulates that, in the case when —!« is not an element of K, K*cc must
not contain less information than that found in Cn(K u {cc}). Clearly,
these postulates place but very weak constraints on the principle o f
minimal change, constraints that far from exhaust the full presystematic
meaning of that principle. This holds in particular when the
new information contradicts the background beliefs, in which case only
(K*3) is applicable of these two postulates.
The revision postulates impose constraints on reasonable operations
of revision, but they do not suggest how specific examples of such
operations can be constructed. A n interesting problem is how to
construct operations that satisfy these constraints. It is commonly
assumed that the revision of AT by a can be reduced to first removing the
negation of a from K (i.e. contracting by —1«) and then adding a (i.e.
expanding by a). This procedure is given a precise representation in the
Levi-identity (here •+• and * denote contraction and revision,
respectively):
K*a = (K + ~,a) + a (Levi identity).
Given the Levi identity, we can define revision in terms of contraction
and expansion.
Since expansion is trivial, the Levi identity reduces the problem how
to construct a revision operation to the problem how to construct a
DISPUTATION A N D C H A N G E OF BELIEF 45
contraction operation. Gardenfors suggested that a contraction
operation be constructed on the basis of an ordering < of epistemic
entrenchment between sentences. That a sentence a is at least as
entrenched in the agent's belief system as the sentence ft is expressed by
writing P< a. According to Gardenfors, "[t]he fundamental criterion for
determining the epistemic entrenchment of a sentence is how useful it is
in inquiry and deliberation." Moreover, "certain pieces of our
knowledge and beliefs about the world are more important than others
when planning future actions, conducting scientific investigations, or
reasoning in general." As an example, Gardenfors notes that the
combining weights is more important in today's chemistry than facts
about the color or taste of substances. The idea here is that we should
not represent a state of belief simply as a belief set but as an ordered pair
of a belief set together with an ordering of epistemic entrenchment. He
goes on to show that it is possible to construct a well-behaved
contraction functions from a relation of epistemic entrenchment,
provided that the relation satisfies some structural requirements. For
instance, one of these requirements says that non-beliefs should be less
entrenched than beliefs. The contraction function so constructed can
then be used to define a revision operation via the Levi identity.
Currently, the field of belief revision is growing rapidly, and it has
attracted attention from computer scientist and logicians as well as
philosophers. Although A G M is the standard theory in the area, several
alternative approaches have emerged. One of the main options is to give
up the requirement of logical closure and to concentrate instead on the
revision of non-closed sets, or belief bases.
5. F R O M DISPUTATION TO REVISION
Given a set A of background beliefs and a linear ordering <A on the set A
of sentences put forward by the opponent, we can use the following
definitorial idea (to be refined below): * is an operation of disputational
revision for K and <A i f and only if <ct, <A , A", K*c£> is a Burleydisputation.
The definition says that we can construct the revision of K
by a, for any sentence a, by carrying out an (imaginary) obligational
disputation in which a is the positum and K the background beliefs of the
respondent. The outcome of the disputation represents the new set of
beliefs.
A central principle behind the A G M theory is the principle of minimal
change, which prescribes that changes of belief be maximally
46 H E N R I K L A G E R L U N D & E R I K J. OLSSON
conservative. For Burley's theory to be a theory of belief revision, it
must adhere to the principle of minimal change. However, our
preliminary definition of disputational revision is too uncommited when
it comes to the set of sentences to be evaluated (the opponent
sentences); as it stands it represent too liberal an approach in the light of
the principle of minimal change. It is compatible with that approach
that only sentences not logically related to the background beliefs are
considered, something which normally is sufficient to ensure that the
outcome is non-conservative.
What sentences, then, should be considered? It seems reasonable to
give the respondent the opportunity to reconsider all previous beliefs in
the light of the new information represented by the positum. Indeed,
once we adopt an idealised picture, nothing prevents us from considering
not only all previous beliefs but all sentences of the whole language. By
considering all sentences we can build a new revised state of belief that is
as complete as possible. In our formalism this means that the variable set
A used in the preliminary definition of disputational revision should be
replaced by the constant L , the complete background language, leading us
to the final definition of disputational revision:
Definition: Let K be a set and < = <L a linear ordering of L. * is an
operation of disputational revision for K and < i f and only if <a, <, K,
K*c£> is a Burley-disputation.
The A G M postulates were designed to capture the meaning of "minimal
change," and it is therefore an interesting question what basic A G M
postulates hold true under the disputational interpretation of revision.
We have verified the following formal properties (see the appendix for
proofs):
(K*\A)K*a = Cn(K*a), ifK h a.
(K*2) ae K*a.
(K*3) K*acCn(K\j {a}).
(K*4.1) If K^a, then Cn{K) u Cn({a}) c K*cc.
(K*5.1) If K is consistent, then K*ais inconsistent if and only iff- —\(x.
(K*6) If h a<-> A then K*a = K*p.
We notice that (K*2), (K*3) and (K*6) can be directly transferred from
A G M revision to disputational revision, while, in the case of the other
A G M postulates, some modification is necessary. ( K * l . l ) says that the
outcome of disputational revision is a logically closed set in the special
DISPUTATION A N D C H A N G E OF BELIEF 47
case that the new information can be derived from the background
beliefs. The property (K*4.1) amounts to a weakening of the fourth
AGM-postulate: in the case in which does not follow from the
background beliefs K*a must not contain less information than what can
be derived either from K or from a.
The statement (K*5.1) expresses the sense in which disputational
revision is 'consistent'; it says that, provided that the background beliefs
are consistent, the consistency of the outcome depends entirely on the
consistency of the input. This property is related to the issue of logical
omniscience. If the respondent is logically omniscient in the sense of
being a perfect deducer, capable of drawing all the correct conclusions
(and no incorrect ones) of any given set of premises, then consistency is
guaranteed, provided that the input is consistent and there is no
contradiction among the respondent's prior beliefs. Note that, unlike
A G M , we do not assume that the respondent/agent is logically
omniscient in the sense that the beliefs she entertains at any given time
are closed under logical consequence. The set K in (K*1.1)-(K*6) may,
but need not, be logically closed.
The fact that disputational revision satisfies (K*3) and (K*4.1) means
that this form of revision adheres to a weak form of conservatism. We
will however argue that in general disputational revision does not
guarantee full conservatism in the absence of further constraints imposed
on the ordering. The crucial observation in this connection was made
already by Spade who noted that, "[i]n general, a given disputation is
more 'conservative' about the sentences proposed earlier than it is about
the sentences proposed later; the former stand a greater chance of being
irrelevant and so judged according to the respondent's knowledge of the
facts."2 2
In fact, a mere difference in order can lead to a radical
difference in perceived degree of conservatism, as is well illustrated by
Example 1 and 2. Recall that in both examples the disputation was used
to construct a revised state of belief given the new, belief-contravening,
information that Reagan is the president of the US. The disputation in
Example 1, in which beliefs were considered before non-beliefs, led to
the revised state that Reagan is the president and Nancy his wife and,
being the wife of the president, also the first lady. The second
disputation (Example 2), in which a non-belief (y = ' N R is the first
lady') was considered before beliefs, gave rise to the more surprising or,
equivalently, less conservative result that Reagan is the president and
that Nancy is his wife but, surprisingly, not the first lady. The
awkwardness of the outcome of the second disputation is due to the fact
48 H E N R I K L A G E R L U N D & ERIK J. OLSSON
that it, unlike the outcome of the first disputation, is incompatible with
the firmly rooted definitorial principle that anyone married to the
(male) president of the US is the first lady.2 3
The effect of Burley's rule for irrelevant sentences on the outcome of
the disputation lends considerable plausibility to the hypothesis that the
purpose of that rule was to introduce a degree of conservatism into the
model, but it is also important to note that the rule does not by itself
guarantee a conservative result. What is also crucial is that the sentences
put forward arrive in the right order. As Space observes, the sooner a
sentence is evaluated in a given disputation, the more likely it is that it
will be evaluated relative to the background beliefs rather than relative to
the set of sentence established so far in the disputation. A consequence is
that for as much as possible of the body of background beliefs to be
preserved, in accordance with the principle of minimal change, it is
necessary that beliefs be evaluated before non-beliefs.
Not only must beliefs be considered before non-beliefs in order to
guarantee conservatism; more important ('entrenched') beliefs must be
evaluated before less important beliefs for the same reason.2 4
Whether
or not a change of belief is minimal or not is not simply a matter of
counting how many beliefs were preserved; it is also imperative that as
many as possible of the important, deeply entrenched beliefs are not
lost. To sum up, full-blown epistemic conservatism requires the following
constraint on the ordering:
(PI) The ordering < = <L used in a disputation D = <a, <, K, D>
must order all sentences of L according to their relative
entrenchment in K.
Surprisingly, our belief revision interpretation led us to a rather plausible
solution to two of the most puzzling facts about Burley's theory: 1) what
sentences to evaluate, and 2) in what order. The solution is so simple
that it is no wonder Burley did not think it necessary to expand on the
subject: all sentences should be evaluated (or i f time is an issue, as many
as possible), and they should be considered in order of epistemic
importance.
We think that the far-reaching structural agreements between Burley's
theory and the A G M theory lends considerable support to our belief
revision interpretation of the former. A remaining question is to what
extent Burely's theory is also a theory of counterfactuals. As we shall
try to show in the next section, that question too can be given a
satisfactory answer.
DISPUTATION A N D C H A N G E OF BELIEF 49
6. F R O M REVISION T O C O U N T E R F A C T U A L S
There is a close connection between, on the one hand, belief revision
and, on the other hand, acceptability criteria for counterfactual
conditionals. The connection is provided by the so-called Ramsey test,
which is described as follows by Gardenfors:
In order to find out whether a conditional sentence is acceptable in a given state of
belief, one first adds the antecedent of the conditional hypothetically to the given
stock of beliefs. Second, if the antecedent together with the formerly accepted
sentences leads to a contradiction, then one makes some adjustments, which are as
small as possible without modifying the hypothetical belief in the antecedent, such
that consistency is maintained. Finally, one considers whether or not the
consequent of the conditional is then accepted in this adjusted state of belief.25
A more compact formulation of the idea is: Accept a sentence of the
form 'If a, then ft in a state of belief K i f and only i f the minimal
change of K needed to accept a also requires accepting ft It is clear that
the Ramsey test presupposes an account of belief revision. The phrase
"the minimal change of K needed to accept a" denotes exactly the
revision of K by a. If we use '•—»' for the 'would'-conditional, then we
can express the Ramsey test as follows:
(RT) a •—• p is acceptable relative to K if and only i f K*a V fi
Hence, given a belief revision operation, we can formulate the
conditions under which a counterfactual conditional is acceptable relative
to a given state of belief.
Note that the Ramsey test provides acceptability conditions rather
than truth-conditions for conditional sentences. The most striking
difference between acceptability conditions and truth-conditions is that
the former, but not the latter, are person-relative; they refer to the
background beliefs of a person. Since the standard account of
conditionals, represented by David Lewis' theory, is concerned with the
conditions under which a conditional sentence is true, the theory of
conditionals associated with the Ramsey test is fundamentally different
from that account.
In the previous section we saw how to go from an obligational
disputation to an operation of belief revision. The Ramsey test takes us
even further: in the form of (RT), it provides us with a route from
disputation, via belief revision, to acceptability criteria for
counterfactuals. In that sense, our belief revision interpretation of
obligational disputation is also a 'counterfactual interpretation.'
50 H E N R I K L A G E R L U N D & ERIK J. OLSSON
In his influential paper from 1982, Paul V . Spade argues that the
medieval theory of obligational disputation is a theory of counterfactual
reasoning. Spade's interpretation is one of the most systematic
interpretations in the literature and has served as a major source o f
inspiration for us. Still there are some differences between Spade's and
our account that are worth pointing out.
In his interpretation of Burley's theory, Spade makes use of the
notion of a possible world, his main idea being that an obligational
disputation specifies a class of possible worlds in which the positum is
true but which otherwise differ as little as possible from the actual world.
It is, according to Spade, the irrelevant sentences that guarantee that the
specified possible worlds are as close as possible to the actual world, since
these sentences are evaluated on the basis of how things are, or on the
basis of how the respondent knows things to be. In contrast, our
interpretation does not refer to possible worlds, but this difference
between our theory and Spade's is clearly superficial, although one might
want to add that our sentence-based account is closer to Burley's own
manner of presentation.
In our formalization we have borrowed and further developed ideas
from Spade. The main difference is that while Spade settles with a rather
unwieldy semi-formalization, our formalization is complete (regarding
the language, the consequence relation et cetera) and, in our view, more
transparent. The difference in degree of precision reflects, to some
extent, a difference in purpose; what mainly motivated us to go a step
further in direction was the prospect of being able to compare the theory
we ascribe to Burley with the A G M theory. Another difference is that
Spade does not consider the case of an impossible positum, nor the case
of a respondent starting out with inconsistent beliefs, whereas our
model is more general in that it handles both these limit cases.
Our use of the Ramsey test corresponds to Spade's use of two
principles that he ascribes to the medieval authors.
(51) For every true (or assertable) counterfactual 4
Were a, then j3'
there is an obligational disputation whose positum is a in
which ft is accepted or -^3 is denied.
(52) For every obligational disputation with positum a in which f3
is accepted or denied, there is a true (or assertable)
counterfactual 'Were a, then ft,' and for every such
disputation in which is denied or -•/? accepted, there is a
counterfactual 'Were a, then -,
j5.>
DISPUTATION A N D C H A N G E OF BELIEF 51
On our interpretation of these principles, (SI) gives a necessary
condition for the validity of a counter factual conditional, and the first
conjunct of (S2) gives a sufficient condition. But, as far as we can see, it
is not possible to extract one combined condition that is both sufficient
and necessary from (SI) and (S2). In particular, the following truth
(acceptability) criterion does not follow: "The counterfactual 'Were a,
then /3' is true (assertable) if and only if: /J is accepted or —1/3 denied in
every obligational disputation in which a is the positum." The Ramsey
test, on the other hand, provides us with a condition which is necessary
•i 1
as well as sufficient for the acceptability of a counterfactual.
Perhaps the most important difference between our and Spade's
account is that we advance a pure epistemic interpretation of Burley,
focusing on belief rather than on truth. In contrast, consider this passage
from Spade:
The epistemic clauses in the rules of obligations make it unclear whether we are
dealing with the conditions for the truth of the counterfactual or for the
respondent's being epistemically in a position to assert the counterfactual. The rules
for relevant sentences favour the former; those for irrelevant sentences favour the
latter.32
It is Spade's view that "we have in obligational disputation a kind of
counterfactual reasoning, a kind that mixes in certain epistemological
factors" (Spade 1982, 11). As pointed out in Section 2, it is admittedly
very difficult to see exactly what role, i f any, the notion of truth plays
in Burley's theory. Nonetheless, the reason Spade gives for his mixed
interpretation in the above quotation is not very convincing and seems
to rest on the misconception that the relevant sentences are evaluated
entirely without (direct or indirect) reference to the respondent's
background beliefs. Recall that a relevant sentence is such that either the
sentence itself or its negation follows from the set of sentences accepted
so far in the disputation. The point is that the latter set is (normally)
not as epistemically innocent as Spade seems to think since nothing
prevents it from containing sentences that were previously found
irrelevant (to the disputation) but were accepted because they follow
from the respondent's background beliefs. Hence, also the relevant
sentences (normally) depend on background beliefs for their acceptance,
although the dependence is indirect in this case.
Finally, it is important for Spade that his interpretation can really
explain the treatment of the irrelevant sentences in an obligational
disputation. As he writes in his 1992 paper, "[i]t is the strikingly odd
treatment of irrelevant propositions that gives the counterfactual
52 HENRIK L A G E R L U N D & ERIK J. OLSSON
interpretation much of its plausibility." (Spade 1992, 173.) According to
Spade, the purpose of the rule for the irrelevant sentences is to guarantee
that the disputation describes "what would happen if the positum were
true but everything else stayed as much as possible the same." (Spade
1982, 12.) We would like to add to Spade's observation that Burley's
rule for irrelevant sentences does not in itself ensure a conservative
outcome; what is also needed is a correct ordering of the proposed
sentences, an ordering which reflects the entrenchment of the sentences
relative to the respondent's system of belief.
7. C O N C L U D I N G DISCUSSION
The medieval treatises of obligationes, their nature and purpose, present
a challenging puzzle to modern scholars of medieval logic, and many o f
the pieces are still missing and others yet to be assembled. Since this
initial study has shown so many direct similarities between Burley's
theory of obligationes and belief revision, it would be of interest to
continue this line of investigation and look at, for example, the theories
of Kilvington and Swyneshed. Another area of future inquiry would be to
consider other types of obligational disputations, not just the positio.
Yet a possible area of research centres around the question what the
medieval theory of obligationes might contribute to the contemporary
discussion of belief revision. The idea of focusing on one sentence at a
time and in this way construct an operation of revision has not received
much attention in the contemporary discussion, but for an attempt in
this general direction see Alchourron and Makinson (1981).
A peculiarity of the modern theory of belief revision is that it is
commonly believed to lack predecessors in the history of logic, very
much in contrast to the situation in modal logic (see Lagerlund 2000).
With this paper we hope to have contributed to a revision of this belief;
if we are correct, belief revision indeed has a history, and that history,
though discontinuous, goes back at least to the medieval treatises de
3 3
obligationibus.
APPENDIX: PROOFS OF OBSERVATIONS
We want to prove the following for an operation * of disputational
revision:
DISPUTATION A N D C H A N G E OF BELIEF 53
(K* 1.1) K*a = Cn(K*a), ifK h a.
(K*2) a e AT*a.
(K*3) K*a^Cn(Ku {a}).
(K*4.2) If A r^oc, then AT u
(K*4.1) If Kf^a, then C«(£) u C « ( { a } ) c ^ a .
(K*5.1) If A is consistent, then A * a i s inconsistent i f and only i f I — 1 « .
(K*6) If Y a<-> p,thenK*a = K*p.
Since proofs of later principles depend on the proofs of previous
principles, the order of the proofs does not correspond to the order of
the principles above (which follows the order of the A G M postulates). In
all proofs below K is a set of sentences and < is a linear ordering of all
sentences of L = {Xo>Xi> ••••> Xn, •••}• A l l clauses referred to are clauses in
the definition of a Burely-disputation.
Lemma 1: Let Du D2, D„, ... be a sequence of sets of sentences. u D ,
is consistent i f the following two conditions are satisfied:
(i) D{ c Di+U i G N (non-decreasing sequence), and
(ii) Dt is consistent for / e N .
Proof: Standard result which follows using compactness. Assume for
contradiction that u£>, is inconsistent so that uDt I- _L (where _L is
arbitrary contradiction). B y the definition of h there is a derivation of X
with hypothesis in KjDt. B y compactness there is a derivation of _L from
a finite subset /32, p\) of u£>,-. For each / < k, e Dm for some m.
Let n be the maximum of all m such that j3,- € Dm for some i < k. Then
Pi, p2, fte D„ and hence D„ V X . But D„ is consistent. We have a
contradiction and we may conclude that Lemma 1 holds. •
Observation 1: Let * be an operation of disputational revision for K and <.
(K*2) ae K*a.
Proof: B y clause (i) of the definition of a Burley-disputation, a e Z)0 .
Hence, a e uDt = K*a. •
Observation 2: Let * be an operation of disputational revision for K and <.
(K*5.1) If K is consistent, then K* a is inconsistent if and only i f I- —ice.
Proof: Assume that K is consistent.
The if-part: follows from (K*2).
54 HENRIK L A G E R L U N D & ERIK J. OLSSON
The only if-part: Assume f—i(X is non-contradictory. We will show that
K*a= uD( is consistent. It is immediate from the definition of a Burleydisputation
that {£),} is a non-decreasing sequence. We will now show
that Dt is consistent for each i e N and then use Lemma 1. We use
induction on i.
Base case: i = 0. D 0 = {oc}. Since a is non-contraditory, DQ is consistent.
Induction hypothesis: DL is consistent. We will show that Di+X is
consistent. Since K and Dt are both assumed consistent, we need to prove
two cases, corresponding to clause (iii) and (iv) of the definition of a
Burley-disputation:
Case l:Di+1 = D;V
Case 1.1: DtY %i- Since £),- is consistent, Dx f By classical logic, D{
u is consistent.
Case 1.2: Dt f %b Dt } K F %i a n
d K is consistent. Since Dt F it
follows by classical logic that DL u {Xi} is consistent.
Case 2: Di+1 = Dt u {~^Xi) • Analogous to Case 1.
We see that in all cases it holds that Di+l is also consistent. Hence £),
is consistent for each / e N . We can now use Lemma 1 and conclude that
uD,- = K * a is consistent. •
Observation 3: Let * be an operation of disputational revision for £ a n d < .
(K*3) K*a<^Cn(K\j {a}).
Proof: We must show that K*a= u D , e Cn(K u {a}). It suffices to
show that D , Q Cn(K u {a}), for i e N . We prove this by induction on i.
Base step: i = 0. D0 = {a} e Cn{K u {a}).
Induction hypothesis: Cn(K u {cc}). It suffices to show that Di+l
c Cn(Ku {a}).
Ltipe Dl+l.
If p G Dh then by the induction hypothesis, p e Cn(K u {a}).
Assume that P <£ /),. There are two principal cases: either P = %{ or
Case 1: p = Xi- Since p was added at step i+\ it must have been added
according to either clause (ii), (iii) or (v) of the definition of a Burley-
disputation.
Case 1.1: /?was added according to clause (ii) so that Z)/ + ] = L . In this
case uD{ = L = K*oc so that K*cc is inconsistent. By (K*5.1), either a is
contradictory or K is inconsistent. In either case, Cn(K u{oc}) = L which
trivially entails that p e Cn(Ku {a}).
DISPUTATION A N D C H A N G E OF BELIEF 55
Case 1.2: ft was added according to clause (iii). Then p must have been
added with reference to either condition (a) or condition (b) of that
clause.
Case 1.2.1: condition (a) of clause (iii) holds so that Dt Y p. Since D( c
Cn{K U {cc}) it follows from the monotony of Cn that Cn(D;) c
Cn(Cn(K U {«})). It follows using the iteration property of Cn that
Cn(Di) c Cn(K u {a}). Since p e C«(D,) it follows that p e Cn(K u
{a}).
Case 1.2.2: condition (b) of clause (iii) holds so that Dtfp, D(f^p, K Y
p. Since KCZKKJ {a} it follows using the monotony of Cn that Cn(K) c
Cn(Ku {a}). B y hypothesis, p e Cn(K) and hence p e Cn(Ku {a}).
Case 1.3: P was instead added in accordance with clause (v). Since in
that case — = —\p was also added, it follows that Di+X is inconsistent.
Since K is inconsistent, Cn(Ku {a}) = L (the language) so that p e Cn(K
u {a}) as desired.
Case 2: p = — T h i s case is symmetrical to case 1, but we will carry
out the proof anyway. Since P was added at step z'+l it must have been
added according to either clause (ii), (iv) or (v).
Case 2.1: p was added according to clause (ii). This case is analogous
to Case 1.1 above.
Case 2.2: p was added according to clause (iv). Then P was so added
with reference to either condition (a) or condition (b) of that clause.
Case 2.2.1 condition (a) of clause (iv) holds so that Dt Y —iXi- Since Dt
c Cn(K u {a}) it follows from the monotony of Cn that Cn(Dt) c
Cn(Cn(K u {a})). It follows using the iteration property of Cn that
Cw(A-) £ Cn(Kv {a}). B y hypothesis, e Cn(Dt). Hence, pe Cn(Kv
{a}).
Case 2.2.2: condition (b) of clause (iv) holds so that Dt f —iXt> A- f
-r-iZn K —*Xi- Since K c K u {a} it follows using the monotony of Cn
that Cn(K) czCn(Ku {a}). B y hypothesis, €
Cn(K) and hence P E
Cn{K\J {a}).
Case 2.3: p = was instead added in accordance with clause (v).
Then Xiw a s a
l s o
added so that Di+l is inconsistent. Since in this case K is
inconsistent, Cn(K u {a}) - L (the language) it follows trivially that P e
Cn(Ku {a}).
We have shown that D{ c Cn(K u {a}) for i e N . It follows that uZ),czCn(Ku
{a}). •
56 H E N R I K L A G E R L U N D & ERIK J. OLSSON
Observation 4: Let * be an operation of disputational revision for £ a n d < .
(K*4.1) If K f - a , then Cn(K) u Cn(cc) c K*a.
Proof: Let p e Cn(K) u Cn({a}). Clearly, P = %i for some / e N . We will
show that p e KjDt. There are two principal cases: either a Y P or K Y p.
The clauses referred to are those in the definition of a Burley-
disputation.
Case 1: ccY p. Since D0 = {a} it follows from the monotony of Cn and
the fact that {£>,-} is non-decreasing that £>, Y p.
Case 1.1: Dt is consistent. Since condition (a) of clause (iii) is
satisfied, it follows that P e Z)1 + 1 . Hence, p e uD,-.
Case 1.2: Dt is inconsistent. B y clause (ii), Di+i = L, It follows trivially
that P e D{+1. Hence, p e uDt.
Case 2: KY p.
Case 2.1: D( is consistent.
Case 2.1.1: Z), 1- p. Since condition (a) of clause (iii) is satisfied it
follows that p G Dm. Hence, p e u D ; .
Case 2.1.2: D{ f p. Assume for contradiction that Dt Y —iP. By (K*3),
u D ; cz Cn{K u {a}). Since Dt Y —ip, it follows by the monotony of Cn
that u D ; Y —>p. From monotony and iteration of Cn it now follows that
-ijS G Cn(K u {a}). B y hypothesis, £ e Cn(K) c C«(/: u {a}). Hence,
u {a} is inconsistent. Using classical logic we conclude that K Y which
contradicts the hypothesis of this theorem. We may conclude that Dt f
-•p. B y hypothesis, K f ^a. Hence K is consistent. Since KY P, condition
(b) of clause (iii) is now satisfied. It follows that p e Di+1. Hence, P e
KjDt.
Case 2.2: Dt is inconsistent. B y clause (ii), Di+1 = L . It follows trivially
that P e Di+l. Hence, p e uD,-.
Finally, we may now conclude that Cn(K) u Cn({a}) c K*cc, provided
that K t^a. •
Observation 5: Let * be an operation of disputational revision for K and <.
( K * l . l ) IfKY a, thenK*a =Cn(K*a),
Proof: Assume that K Y a. It is trivial that K*a c Cn(K*a). It remains
to show that Cn{K*a) c K*a.
We first show that K*a = Cn(K).
For the inclusion K * a c Cn(K) it suffices to prove that D,- c Cn(K)
for / e N , where uZ); = K*a.
DISPUTATION A N D C H A N G E OF BELIEF 57
Base case: i = 0. Since D0 = {a} and since by assumption K Y a, it
follows that D0 cz Cn(K) so that the inclusion holds in this case.
Induction hypothesis: Dt cz Cn(K). We will show that Di+l cz Cn(K).
Let p G D I + ] . If (3G DI it follows directly by the induction hypothesis
that P e Cn(K). Assume therefore that P £ Dt. Hence, P = %( or p = -y%t.
Since j3was added at step i+1, it must have been added because of one of
the rules (ii), (iii), (iv) or (v) in the definition of a Burley-disputation
since only these rules add something.
Case I: P was added in accordance with clause (ii). Then Di+1 = L.
Hence, K*a = u D , = L. B y (K*5.1) this means that either AT or a is
inconsistent. Since K Y a it follows that in either case K is inconsistent so
that P e Di+i = L = Cn(K) as desired.
Case 2: p = %t was added in accordance with clause (iii).
Case 2.1: P was added in accordance with clause (iii) (a) and
consequently Dt Y p. Hence, P e Cn(D,). B y the induction hypothesis and
the monotonicity of C«, C«(D( ) c Cn(Cn(K) and, furthermore, using the
iteration and inclusion property of Cn, Cn(Cn{K)) = Cn(K) so that
Cn(Dt) czCn(K). Consequently, p e Cn(K).
Case 2.2: P was added in accordance with clause (iii) (b). It follows
directly that p e Cn(K).
Case 3: P = was added in accordance with clause (iv). This is
parallel to case 2 above.
Case 4: p was added in accordance with clause (v). In this case K is
inconsistent and therefore p e Cn(K).
We now turn to the other direction of the inclusion: Cn(K) <z K*a. Let p
e Cn(K). Clearly P = %{ for some / > 0. We must show that P e D[+l.
Case I: K is inconsistent. Then p is added by clause (iv) in the
definition of a Burley-disputation.
Case 2: K is consistent. Since K Y a it follows that a is non-
contradictory.
Case 2.1: Dt Y p. In that case it follows by clause (iii) (a) that p € Dm.
Case 2.2: Dt f p. We want to show that Dt f -./?. We first note that
since K Y a and K is consistent, it follows that K f —.a. It now follows
from (K*4.1) that K cz K*oc. We also note that since K is consistent and
a is non-contradictory it follows from (K*5.1) that K*a is consistent.
Now, assume that D{ Y —tP. It follows using clause (iv) (a) that —tP e
and hence that —1/3 e u D f = K*a entailing that -,p e Cn(K*a). But since
K cz K* a it follows using the monotonicity of Cn that Cn(K) cz Cn(K*oc)
and, since P e Cn(K) by assumption, that P e Cn(K*a), which is
58 H E N R I K L A G E R L U N D & ERIK J. OLSSON
contradicted by —1/3 e Cn(K*a) and the consistency of K*a.
Consequently, D, f — S i n c e the four conditions in clause (iii) (b) are all
satisfied we conclude, using that clause, that (3 e
This concludes the proof of Cn(K) c K*a.
We have shown that K*a~ Cn(K). What we really wanted to show
was that Cn(K*a) cz K*a. Note that it follows from the monotonicity
and iteration property of Cn that Cn(Cn(K)) c Cn(K). Substituting K*a
for Cn(K) we get the desired inclusion Cn(K*a) c K*a. This concludes
the proof. •
Observation 6: Let * be an operation of disputational revision for K and <
(K*6) If h A then K*a^K*f3.
Proof sketch: Assume that a <-> (5 and consider the two Burleydisputations
D = <a, <, K, D> and D' - <(3, < K,D'>. It sufficies to show
that D-D.' That this indeed holds is clear considering three facts: (i)
that the sentences are considered in the same order in the two
disputations, (ii) that all sentences are considered in both cases, and (iii)
that the rules for the computation of the outcome of a disputation in no
way depends on the syntactic form of the positum. The details are left
to the reader. •
Uppsala University and Konstanz University
N O T E S
1
For the historical development of the theory see Stump 1982 and Yrjonsuuri
1994.
2
"Omne positum, sub forma positi propositum, in tempore positionis, est
concedendum." (Burley 1963, 46.) See also Kretzmann and Stump 1988, 379.
3
"Omne sequens ex posito est concedendum. Omne sequens ex posito cum
concesso vel concessis, vel cum opposito bene negati vel oppositis bene
negatorum, scitum esse tale, est concedendum." (Burley 1963, 48.) See also
Kretzmann and Stump 1988, 381.
4
In this we follow Spade 1982. See clause (2) (b) in his semi-formalization of
Burley's theory on p. 6.
5
A similar idealisation is made by Spade 1982, 6. See also his footnote 22.
6
"Omne repugnans posito est negandum. Similiter omne repugnans posito cum
concesso vel concessis, vel opposito bene negati vel oppositis bene negatorum,
scitum esse tale, est negandum." (Burley 1963, 48.) See also Kretzmann and
Stump 1988, 381.
DISPUTATION A N D C H A N G E OF BELIEF 59
7
"Omne propositum aut est pertinens aut impertinens. Si sit impertinens,
respondendum est secundum sui qualitatem, et hoc, secundum qualitatem quam
habet ad nos, Ut, si sit verum, scitum esse verum, debet concedi. Si sit falsum,
scitum esse falsum, debet negari. Si sit dubium, respondendum est dubie." (Burley
1963, 48.) See also Kretzmann and Stump 1988, 381.
8
For our purposes, the distinction between what is believed and what is justifiably
believed can be disregarded. We may assume that our respondent is epistemically
rational in the sense that all her beliefs are justified.
9
The language L is assumed to be a standard propositional language built up from
the usual connectives. We use lower case Greek letters as variables over elements of
L and normal upper case letters as variables over subsets of L. By a consequence
operation on the language L, we mean a function Cn such that the following
conditions hold for all subsets A and B of L: (i) A <z Cn(A) (inclusion), (ii) If A c
B, then Cn{A) c Cn(5) (monotonicity) and (iii) Cn(Cn(,4)) c Cn{A) (iteration). We
will also assume that the following properties are satisfied: (iv) if a can be derived
from A by classical truth-functional logic, then a e Cn(A) (supraclassicality), (v) if
ft G Cn(A u {a}), then a->{5 e Cn(^) (deduction), and (vi) if a e Cn(A)t then
there is a finite set A' c A such that a e Cn(A') (compactness). We use l
A h a* and
' a s Cn(^4)' interchangably. A set A is logically closed iff A = Cn(A), A set A is
consistent if and only if there is no sentence a such that A h oc&—i(X. A set which
is not consistent is inconsistent.
1 0
This means, here and in the following, that the linearly (simply) ordered set <A,
<A> is isomorphic with an initial segment of the natural numbers for A c L
1 1
Note the similarity between Burley's construction and the standard construction
used in proofs of the completeness of classical propositional logic using the
Lindenbaum method, of constructing out of a set A of formulae and a formula %
such that A f% a maximal set A' 3 A of formulae with A1
f %. In the Lindenbaum
construction all formulae are ordered into a sequence f}2, ... and
A0=A
Ai+i = At u {pi}, if Ai u {[}} is consistent, and
Ai+i =AiU {—ifli} else.
Finally, A' = uA,. See also Martin 1993, 366.
1 2
See Spade 1982, 4, and Yrjonsuuri 1994, 8.
1 3
"[0]rdo estmaxime attendendus." (Burley 1963, 52.) See also Kretzmann
and Stump 1988, 385.
1 4
"[S]it ita quod Socrates et Plato sint nigri, et ponatur Socratem esse album.
Tunc, si primo loco proponatur haec: 'Soctates et Plato sunt similes,' esset
concedenda, quia vera et impertinens. Et si postea proponeretur, haec: 'Plato est
albus,' esset concedenda, quia sequens. Si, tarnen, ista: 'Plato est albus,' primo
loco proponeretur, esset negenda, quia falsa et impertinens. Si postea proponeretur:
'Socrates et Plato sunt similes,' esset negenda, quia repugnans." (Burley 1963, 52.)
See also Kretzmann and Stump 1988, 385.
See Spade 1982, 17, for this observation.
Burley's example is most naturally formalized using features of predicate logic
not found in sentential logic. We leave it as an exercise to carry out that
formalization.
60 H E N R I K L A G E R L U N D & ERIK J. OLSSON
Superficially, an obligational disputation shares many of the characteristics of a
game: it has two participants that appear to compete in a process evolving in
accordance with formally specified rules, yet admitting some degree of creativity, at
least on the opponent's part. For someone defending the game-interpretation of
obligational disputation, it is crucial to explain who wins the game in the different
outcomes. The issue loses its interest if one instead adopts a convenient fictioninterpretation,
since, on that interpretation, obligational disputation is not a game
in the first place (unless, of course, one thinks of obligational disputation as form
of logical solitaire, a rather remote possibility considering the amount of energy
devoted to its study in the Middle Ages). Spade opposes the game-interpretation in
Spade 1977, 244.
'8
See Alchourron, Gardenfors and Makinson 1985.
1 9
See Gardenfors 1988, 53.
2 0
Gardenfors 1988, 87.
21
For the belief base approach, see Hansson 1994.
2 2
See Spade 1982, 16.
2 3
The revision operations constructed in Examples 1 and 2 are, strictly speaking,
not operations of disputational revision in the technical sense of the above
definition, since the opponent sequences do not include the whole language. But
the sequences could clearly be continued without affecting the point made here.
2 4
It might be held that the entrenchment and epistemic importance are two separate
things. In not making that distinction we essentially follow Gardenfors 1988.
2 5
Gardenfors 1988, 147. See also Ramsey 1931, 248, and Stalnaker 1968, 102.
2 6
Martin 1993, 366 writes that the procedure of positio "does recall the use of the
so-called Ramsey test".
27
See Yrjonsuuri 1994 for a more thorough discussion on this.
28
"Since we are not considering that special kind of obligatio in which the positum
is impossible, will be a consistent set" (Spade, 1982, 7). (Here Xs is the set of
sentences granted at step / of the disputation.) Spade's statement is unproblematic
only under the assumption that the background beliefs of the respondent form a
consistent set. If that assumption is not made we fail to see why the inconsistency
of Xi could not be traced back to the inconsistency of the respondent's beliefs.
There are examples in the medieval literature where liar-type paradoxes are
considered, and the contradictions arising in these examples are sometimes best
classified as belonging to the sphere of background knowledge. See Martin 1993
for the medieval treatment of liar-paradoxes in the disputation setting.
2 9
See Spade 1982, 13-14. The principles (SI) and (S2) correspond to (6) and (7) in
Spade's paper.
3
In his 1982 paper, footnote 41, Spade refers to the account of counterfactual
conditionals developed by Sobel 1970. Spade claims (without proof) that his
account of Burley's theory validates many of the inference patterns (V1-V9 and
V12-V13) considered by Sobel, given (SI) and (S2) and omniscience on the part of
the respondent. This is a surprising claim since the theory Spade ascribes to Burley
is not precise enough to admit that kind of exact validation. A related problem is
that some of Sobel's inference patterns make use of iterated counterfactuals, a
feature that would presumably require the presence of counterfactual conditionals in
the object language.
DISPUTATION A N D C H A N G E OF BELIEF 61
3 1
In both the 1982 paper (pp. 9-14) and the 1992 paper (pp. 178-180) Spade
stresses the fact that he is talking about, so called, would-conditionals. On the
other hand, (SI) seems more plausible as an account of might-conditionals than of
would-conditionals. A similar observation is made by Martin 1993, 366.
3 2
Spade 1982, 13, footnote 42.
3 3
We would like to thank Kaj Btfrge Hansen, Sven Ove Hansson, David Makinson
and Mikko Yrjonsuuri for their helpful comments on earlier drafts of this paper.
The material contained in the paper was discussed at the philosophy seminar in
Uppsala, and we are indebted to Sten Lindstrom, Krister Segerberg, Lennart Aqvist
and the other participants for their feedback.
REFERENCES
Alchourron, C. E., Gardenfors, P., and Makinson, D., 1985. "On the Logic of
Theory Change: Partial Meet Functions for Contraction and Revision," Journal
of Symbolic Logic 50, 510-530.
Alchourron, C. E., and Makinson, D., 1981. "Hierarchies of regulations and their
logic," in R. Hilpinen (ed.), New Studies in Deontic Logic, Dordrecht, D.
Reidel, 125-148.
Ashworth, E. J., 1981. "The Problems of Relevance and Order in Obligational
Disputations: Some Later Fourtheenth Century Views," Medioevo 7, 175-193.
Burley, Walter, 1963. "Tractatus de obligationibus," ed. R. Green, in The Logical
Treatise 'De obligationibus': An Introduction with Critical Texts of William of
Sherwood (?) and Walter Burley, Ph. D. Thesis, Louvain.
Gardenfors, P., 1988. Knowledge in Flux: Modeling the Dynamics of Epistemic
States, Cambridge, MA, MIT Press.
Hansson, S. O., 1994. "Taking Belief Bases Seriously," in D. Prawitz and D.
Westerstahl (eds.), Logic and Philosophy of Science in Uppsala, Dordrecht,
Kluwer, 13-28.
Knuuttila, Simo, 1993. Modalities in Medieval Philosophy, London, Routledge.
Knuuttila, Simo, and Yrjonsuuri, Mikko, 1988. "Norms and Action in
Obligational Disputations," in O. Pluta (ed.), Die Philosophic im 14. und 15.
Jahrhundert, (Bochumer Studien zur Philosophie 10), Amsterdam, Griiner,
191-202.
Kretzmann, Norman, and Stump, Eleonore, 1988. The Cambridge Translations of
Medieval Philosophical Texts: Volume One: Logic and the Philosophy of
Language, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Lagerlund, Henrik, 2000. Modal Syllogistics in the Middle Ages, Leiden, Brill.
Martin, Christopher, 1993. "Obligations and Liars," in S. Read (ed.), Sophisms in
Medieval Logic and Grammar, Dordrecht, Kluwer, 357-381, Revised version in
the present collection, pp. 65-96.
Paul of Venice 1988. Logica Magna, Part II, Fascicule 8, [Tractatus De
obligationibus], (ed. with transl. and notes) E. J. Ashworth, (Classical and
Medieval Logic Texts, vol. 5), Oxford, British Academy, Oxford University
Press.
62 H E N R I K L A G E R L U N D & ERIK J. OLSSON
Ramsey, F. P., 1931. "General propositions and causality," in his Foundations of
Mathematics and Other Logical Essays, New York, Routledge & Kegan Paul,
237-257.
Sobel, J. H., 1970. "Utilitarianisms: Simple and General," Inquiry 13, 394^149.
Spade, Paul Vincent, 1977. "Roger Swyneshed's Obligationes: Edition and
Comments," Archives d'histoire doctrinale et litteraire du moyen age 44,
243-285.
Spade, Paul Vincent, 1982. "Three Theories of Obligationes; Burley, Kilvington
and Swyneshed on Counterfactual Reasoning," History and Philosophy of
Logic 3, 1—32.
Spade, Paul Vincent, 1992. "If Obligationes Were Counterfactuals," Philosophical
Topics 20, 171-188.
Stalnaker, R., 1968. "A theory of conditionals," in N . Rescher (ed.), Studies in
Logical Theory, (American Philosophical Quarterly Monograph Series, no. 2),
Oxford, Blackwell, 98-112.
Stump, Eleonore, 1982. "Obligations: A. From The Beginning to The Early
Fourteenth Century," in N . Kretzmann, A. Kenny, J. Pinborg and E. Stump
(eds.), The Cambridge History of Later Medieval Philosophy from the
Rediscovery of Aristotle to the Disintegration of Scholasticism, 1100—1600,
Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 315-334.
Yrjonsuuri, Mikko, 1994. Obligationes: Nth Century Logic of Disputational
Duties, (Acta Philosophica Fennica 55), Helsinki, Societas Philosophica
Fennica.
Yrjonsuuri, Mikko, 1996. "Obligations as Thought Experiments," in I. Angelelli
and M. Cerezo (eds.), Studies in the History of Logic, Berlin, Walter de Gruyter,
79-96.
CHRISTOPHER J. M A R T I N
O B L I G A T I O N S A N D L I A R S
The best efforts of some of the best historians of logic have failed to
find a clear source in material inherited from the ancient world for the
earliest mediaeval discussions of the Liar paradox.1
The obvious
candidates, and most importantly Aristotle's reference to the puzzles of
oath-breakers and liars in the Sophistical Refutations, seem to have been
of little importance in the first theorising about insolubilia? Despite
this I would like to suggest that there was at least a very distant cause in
late antique logic for the appearance of the Liar and its relatives in the
twelfth century. It cannot be emphasised enough, however, that twelfth
century logicians devised the paradoxes for themselves and that their
solutions were all their own work.
Three things are important in the construction of the Liar and
variations upon it. As Saul Kripke has emphasised, in the appropriate
circumstances just about any statement involving truth or falsity may
turn out to be paradoxical. Once this is pointed out it is easy to see that
there can be no syntactic or semantic sieve in which to trap all instances
of ungroundedness. Whether or not, for example, utterances of the
sentences 'everything that Socrates says is false' and 'everything that
Plato says is false' are paradoxical depends upon who says them, what
else they say, when they are said, and the way the world happens to be
then. No doubt circularity sometimes occurs by chance but in general we
need to arrange the circumstances of utterance, inscription, or thought
so as to guarantee it. This stage-setting was done in the middle ages by
means of a hypothesis or positio. The theory of such hypotheses was
regimented in treatises on the obligatio of the same name and it is to
these, I suggest, that we should look if we want to understand how the
mediaeval concern with insolubilia originated and the character of the
earliest solution.
Secondly, in order to achieve paradoxical circularity or self-reference
a certain amount of semantical and syntactical equipment is necessary.
In particular truth and falsity must be available as predicates in the
language and must behave in the appropriate way in conjunction with a
suitable referential apparatus. The paradoxes arise because of a conflict
63
M. Yrjonsuuri (ed.), Medieval Formal Logic 63—94.
© 2001 Kluwer Academic Publishers. Printed in the Netherlands.
64 CHRISTOPHER J. M A R T I N
between our intuitions about truth and falsity and our intuitions about the
power of natural languages to deploy these predicates. Furthermore the
choice between sentences, statements, and propositions as bearers o f
truth will lead to different formulations of and different solutions to the
Liar. A n inscriptionalist like Buridan can, for example, make moves
which would be entirely unacceptable to someone who maintains a
realistic account of propositional contents.
Thirdly, the acceptance or rejection of particular logical principles
may facilitate or prevent the derivation of disturbing consequences from
the Liar sentence. I have in mind for example the Parvipontanian
adoption of strict implication and the associated paradoxes, Abaelard's
qualifications of the principles of quotation and disquotation, and the
requirement of the Melidunenses and Porretani that for a conditional to
be true it is necessary for the antecedent and the consequent to be about
the same thing. In this paper I will limit myself to a discussion of the
first two points.4
1. OBLIGATIONS
The writers of the mediaeval treatises on obligations are irritatingly
vague about both the history and the purposes of their works. There are
some clues, however, to the development of the obligation known as
positio and these suggest an account of its intended application.
1.1 Eudemian Hypotheses and Eudemian Procedures
The treatises published by de Rijk as TE and OP are certainly the oldest
accounts of obligations discovered so far. Each justifies impossible
positio with an appeal to Aristotle who, as OP claims, requires that 'an
impossibility be posited in order to see what follows from i t . ' 5
There
seems to be no such injunction in Aristotle's writings but something
rather like it is found in Boethius' De Hypotheticis Syllogismis.6
There
Eudemus is credited with distinguishing between a hypothesis, or positio,
which is the condition of a consequence, i.e. the antecedent of a
conditional, and a hypothesis by means of which 'something which can
in no way come about is agreed to... in order that reason may be pursued
to its limit.' A s an example Boethius cites the separation in thought o f
the form of a body from its matter so that 'for a little while that is
OBLIGATIONS A N D LIARS 65
understood to be so which can in no way come about' in order that we
may consider what follows.
Let us call these conditions of agreement Eudemian hypotheses and
the arguments carried out under them Eudemian procedures. Garlandus
Compotista characterises Eudemian hypotheses as being per consensum
and offers the example of conceding 'that a man is a stone, in order to
see how far reason can go.'7
Nothing like this hypothesis is found in the
authority which Garland defers to as The Book, which consists of the
works of Boethius, but the use of positio impossibilis in the exploration
of the logic of impossible unions is the main topic of TEL A n account o f
such unions is also of great importance to Abaelard in developing his
theory of the conditional. Abaelard characterises a Eudemian hypothesis
as by 'consent and concession ... a proposition which is not taken as true
in itself, but is rather conceded for the sake of argument, so that we may
see what can be extracted from i t . ' 8
Notice that he does not insist upon
the impossibility of the hypothesis.
Boethius' example is not particularly helpful but one thing is clear, he
supposes that Eudemus had in mind something quite different from the
method of reduction to an impossibility employed in the theory of the
syllogism. There the aim is to show that a hypothesis is impossible by
showing that an impossibility follows from it and appealing o f
Aristotle's rule that the impossible cannot follow from the possible. In a
Eudemian procedure on the other hand we start with something agreed to
be impossible and set out to explore its logical structure. A s we will see,
Aristotle's rule construed as requiring actualisability justifies possible
rather than impossible positio. It is indeed cited to this end in some later
accounts of obligations though it does not appear in TE or OP.
Boethius employs Eudemian procedures on a number of occasions but
most explicitly in his treatment in Quomodo Substantiae of the
problem of how created things can be good in so far as they exist but not
be substantial goods. If we look at some twelfth century commentaries
on Quomodo we find an interesting development in the descriptions o f
Boethius' request there that we do in thought what is impossible in act.
Gilbert of Poitiers does not have a special term for it but Thierry o f
Chartres refers to the exercise as positio per impossibile per consensum.
Finally Clarembald of Arras calls Boethius' hypothesis a positio
impossibilis and finds in his argument a positio possibilis.9
None of these writers mentions obligatio but it is clear that the kinds
of thought-experiment that Boethius proposes can be well conducted
only i f there are some rules about what counts as an acceptable
66 CHRISTOPHER J. M A R T I N
inference. Philosophers spend much of their time reasoning under
hypotheses and in the middle ages they registered this activity with the
word 'ponatur.' One of the functions of the positio was certainly to
regiment the varieties of hypothetical reasoning and to provide practice
in the rules of inference applicable in them.
Unfortunately Boethius tells us nothing about the formalities of the
kind of 'counterpossible' reasoning employed in Eudemian procedures.
As I have shown elsewhere, however, from various of his works it is
possible to extract two notions of inseparability and corresponding to
them two accounts of consequence. In the weaker sense two things are
inseparable i f they cannot actually be separated but they may
nevertheless be conceived apart. I call this strict inseparability. T h e
corresponding conditional is true just in case it is impossible for the
antecedent to be true and the consequent false at the same time. In the
stronger sense two things are inseparable i f they cannot even be
conceived apart. This I call conceptual inseparability. T h e
corresponding conditional holds just in case one cannot conceive the
antecedent without conceiving the consequent.1 0
Though poorly conducted, the thought-experiment of Quomodo gives
some content to the distinction between strict and conceptual
inseparability. If a situation, albeit an impossible one, can be constructed
in which two things exist in some sense independently of one another,
then they are not conceptually connected and so neither belongs in the
definition of the other. Boethius' authority makes this sort o f reasoning
respectable and important but he offers no hint of how we are to avoid
begging the question of what is conceptually separable from what.
1.2 Impossible Positio
In the twelfth century the most important work on this problem was
done by Abaelard and its results can be seen in the TEL Although
insolubilia are not introduced in this kind of positio, I would like to look
at the work briefly since I think it can provide some useful clues to the
early history o f their treatment and also help to answer a singularly
vexed question in the history of logic.
TEI in accordance with the principle attributed to Aristotle will allow
us to posit any impossibility which may be understood. It claims that
since we can understand the claim that that God is man is true and that
this is harder to understand than that that a man is an ass is true we may
posit the latter. The comparison and the example turn out not to be
OBLIGATIONS A N D LIARS 67
accidental. TEI is for the most part devoted to a discussion of the various
kinds of impossible union and has a logic to offer for reasoning about
them.
In impossible positio the positum is of course impossible but since the
aim is to avoid conceding contradictory proposita it cannot be such that
contradictory opposites may be derived from it by means of the
principles of inference appropriate for this sort of positio. Thus in
agreeing to take part in an impossible positio we must forgo the pleasure
of appealing to the thesis, attributed to the Adamatae in TEI, that
whatever you like follows from an impossibility. That is not all we must
give up, however, since inconsistency may be derived from an
impossibility independently of the rule. Suppose, for example, that we
posit as TEI suggests that a man is an ass. We may then appeal to the
locus 'from opposites' to prove that a man is not a man. This move is
exactly what Abaelard's theory of the conditional is devised to avoid.
TEI embraces at least part of that theory by insisting that consequences
with affirmative antecedents and negative consequents must not be
accepted in impossible positio and in allowing no appeal to the locus
'from opposites.'
More interestingly TEI rehearses but confuses Abaelard's arguments
against the truth of ' i f its a man, then it's not an ass.' Abaelard
maintains that conditionals of mixed quality are false since the sense o f
the antecedent cannot contain the sense of the consequent and so they
do not express natural consequences. TEI, on the other hand, claims that
such conditionals may express natural consequences but that since we can
understand the combination of the forms of, say, a man and an ass in a
single subject, the understanding of one does not exclude that of the
other. Since it is understanding rather than nature with which impossible
positio is concerned we are not allowed to appeal to such consequences
there.
TEI thus relies on Abaelardian logic in reasoning from an impossibility
and this is also the logic associated with the Nominales. There is,
however, at least one curious thesis identified with that school which,
pace Calvin Normore, Abaelard apparently would not have accepted.1 1
Jacques of Vitry tells us that, in opposition to the Adamatae, the
Nominales maintained that nothing grows. It is striking that just this
conclusion follows immediately from the principles of predication set
down in TEI. It seems, then, that in TEF and TEI we have works
connected with the Nominales and interesting information on their
beliefs about essential and personal predication.
68 CHRISTOPHER J. M A R T I N
Having mentioned one outrageous positio Nominalium let me note
that another, obviously related to it, is found in the Obligationes
attributed to William of Sherwood. In what is known as vicarious positio
we are asked to respond to questions as someone else would. Walter
Burley gives the example of being asked to respond as Zeno would to the
proposition that nothing moves. In the parallel passage in Sherwood the
proposal that something moves is put to someone required to answer as a
Nominalis. The proper response is to deny it.
It seems to me that the evidence of this positio on its own outweighs
all the similarities pointed out by Spade and Stump in arguing that Burley
was the author of the work attributed to Sherwood.1 3
It is surely much
more likely that Burley was updating a old, perhaps standard, text and in
this case providing an example that would make sense to his
contemporaries. The only other argument offered by Spade and Stump
for the late dating of 'pseudo-Sherwood' is the sophistication that they
find in its distinction of different kinds of consequence. They are quite
wrong, however, in supposing that such sophistication is a late
development in mediaeval logic. It is all available and much more in
Abaelard's Dialectical
Though I think that reflection upon Eudemian procedures and their
regimentation was quite probably an important factor in the early
development of positio it cannot be denied that in the texts that have
survived positio impossibilis appears as very much a poor relative of
positio possibilis. This is, I suppose, how it should be. It is not often that
we are required to indulge in counterpossible inference and nowadays,
indeed, the prevailing view seems to be that it can't be done at all.1 5
Counterfactual reasoning where the fact is contingent is, however,
something that we do all the time and something which needs to be
codified.
1.3 The Purpose of Possible Positio
That much being obvious, there has been considerable disagreement over
exactly what purpose is served by the rules for positio. Recently the
debate has turned upon whether or not they were intended to provide a
means for evaluating counterfactual conditionals. Conditionals, that is,
such as ' i f you were to promise me a penny, I would be very suspicious o f
your motives.' Paul Spade has argued that positio was indeed constructed
for the evaluation of such sentences but that it was not very good at its
job.1 6
Eleonore Stump on the other hand thinks that this was not its job
OBLIGATIONS A N D LIARS 69
at all.1 7
As far as I know Stump does not address Spade's positive
arguments but rather takes the failure of positio to give the right results
as a proof that it was not supposed to give them. Stump's view is, I am
sure, correct. Whatever motivated the introduction of the so called nova
responsio in about 1330 there is no suggestion in treatments of positio
falsa current before that date that the device was to be employed in the
evaluation or generation of counterfactuals. The discussion has been
confused by a failure to distinguish between 'would' and 'might'
conditionals and between the corresponding forms of counterfactual
reasoning. With these distinctions made we can give a much more
plausible account of the workings and purposes of positio.
Accounts of positio provide two things at once. Firstly a procedure for
putting claims of possibility to the test of actualisation suggested by
Aristotle's criterion of possibility. Secondly, and in consequence, the
rules for an exercise in which one may gain practice in recognising the
truth of conditionals and the validity of arguments. The latter is made
more complicated by the cumulative character of positio. A t each stage
the respondent has to decide the relationship of the propositum to the
set of sentences all of which he is required by his earlier answers to hold
true. What follows from or is repugnant to this set is more than what
follows from or is repugnant to the positum alone since at any point
arbitrary truths, logically independent, of what has gone before may be
added to the set. This feature of positio seems to serve an essentially
pedagogical function. It complicates the antecedent that the respondent
has to consider in deciding how to reply and can make delightfully
difficult the exercise of detecting consequence and repugnance. The
more so, since there is no requirement that the principle of
compositionality be observed in proposing compound proposita. That is
to say a compound may be posited or proposed without all or any of its
components having already been posited or proposed. Thus, notoriously,
starting from the same positum one may be required to concede a given
propositum in one positio and deny it in another.
Spade finds accounts of positio reminiscent of treatments of the
semantics of counterfactual conditionals in recent philosophical logic by
means of possible worlds.1 9
In such accounts, however, possible worlds
are taken as primitive and a given counterfactual conditional is evaluated
by considering the properties of the the worlds in which the antecedent
is true. In the various treatises on positio on the other hand there is
absolutely no suggestion that the problem is to decide whether a given
counterfactual is true or not. Nor is there any hint that at some point in
70 CHRISTOPHER J. M A R T I N
a positio one may stop and conditionalise to generate a true
counterfactual with the positum for its antecedent and the last conceded
propositum for its consequent. Indeed, at least according twelfth and
thirteenth century logic, the result of such a conditionalisation would
often be false. In the theory of consequences there was no place for a
contingently true conditional with a false antecedent. A necessary
condition for the truth of a conditional was always that it be more or less
strictly necessary and on the rare occasions when subjunctive
conditionals were noticed it was not in virtue of any semantical
peculiarity but rather because they do not satisfy Boethius' requirement
that conditionals have propositions as their parts.
What one obtains in a positio starting from a possible positum is not a
sequence of propositions which would be true i f the positum were true
but rather a sequence of propositions each compossible, or better
cotenable, with the positum. The rules for handling irrelevant proposita
guarantee that the relationship between the positum and any given
concessum can be no stronger than that. Thus the most that can be 'read
off a properly conducted possible positio is that the positum is
cotenable with a given concessum or the opposite of a given negatum.
Spade is impressed by the relationship which exists between the
positum P and a propositum Q properly conceded in a properly
conducted positio. It is (1) intransitive and such that both (2)
strengthening the antecedent and (3) contraposition fail. These are
certainly all properties of 'would' counterfactuals but that shouldn't
impress us too much since they are so in virtue of the necessity that the
antecedent and consequent of a true counterfactual be compossible.
Unlike, say, the antecedent and consequent of a true material
implication. The important point is that the relationship between P and
Q has the properties of cotenability which 'would' counterfactuals do
not have. It is (4) symmetric and (5) such that i f P and Q are contingent
and logically independent, then both Q and -'Q may be properly
conceded in positiones with positum P. This latter because cotenability
follows from logical independence plus contingency.
Far from regarding it as an embarrassing difficulty to be explained
away accounts of positio dignify this last feature as the rule that: With a
possible falsehood as positum any contingent proposition maybe proved
and conceded.
OP proves the case for a contingent falsehood as follows. Let ' P '
stand for ' Y o u are in Rome' andi
Qf
for ' Y o u are a bishop':
OBLIGATIONS A N D LIARS 71
In rei veritate: ->P, -<Q;
Possible: P
Po: P
Pr,: P&.-'Q
the positum,
does not follow from Po, and
it is false so it is to be denied,
follows from the denial of
Pr] so it is to be conceded,
follows from Po and Pr2
so it is to be conceded.
Pr2 : -(P & - 0
Pr3 : Q
Having stated the rule for possible posita and contingent falsehoods,
however, OP goes on to claim that the 'rule will not hold for the
consequentia Nominalium 'since i f one takes for Q an impossibility, the
Nominales would still have to deny Pr^ Given OP's account of the tests
of relevance in terms of the truth of appropriately constructed
conditionals, the alternative must have been to believe that the addition
of a necessity to the consequent of a true conditional makes no
difference. That is to say the Nominales rejected oQ r- P —> (P & Q)
Note that this a weaker claim than the second Parvipontanian thesis
that a necessity follows from anything and in rejecting it the Nominales
are rejecting more. Assuming that what they required was containment
of sense then the rejection of this principle seems more than reasonable.
It is not clear quite where OP stands in the debate since in the discussion
of depositio, for obvious reasons, it instructs those who uphold the rule
that anything follows from an impossibility not to accept a necessity as
a depositum.
Rather than talking of cotenability here we could use the so-called
'might' counterfactual for example: ' i f you were to promise me a horse,
then I might ask to see it.' The only true counterfactual that can be read
off the positio in the example is the relatively uninteresting one: ' i f you
were in Rome, then you might be a bishop.' If P is false but might be
true, then a respondent accepting it as positum and obeying the rules o f
positio will never be led to contradict himself. If at some point he
concedes Q, then the relation between P and Q is such that we can say
that i f P were so, then Q might be so. Conversely i f this is so then, there
is a positio starting from P in which Q is conceded. That is what we
might say but mediaevals would not have done so since the positio
already says it all.2 2
Though the procedure of positio cannot be construed in terms of the
most recent possible worlds accounts of counterfactual conditionals it
72 CHRISTOPHER J. M A R T I N
does recall the use of the so-called Ramsey test in earlier modern
2 3
attempts to deal with such propositions. The 'metalogical' accounts o f
counterfactuals proposed by Chisholm, Goodman and Mackie, each i n
their simplest form propose that a counterfactual l
P n-^R' is true just in
case there are propositions Qh Qn which are true of the actual world,
compatible with P, and from which, in conjunction with P, R follows in
virtue o f some general principle L. The case of the man who is a bishop
when he is in Rome illustrates why such accounts must fail. If P and R
are logically unrelated and R is contingent then not (P & is
cotenable with P and true. B y modus ponens R follows from P and
-•(P & --R). This result trivialises such 'metalogical' accounts o f
counterfactuals and positio interpreted as one of them. Since the result is
known and not opposed in any way in the early treatises we surely
cannot regard them as attempts at an account of *would' counterfactuals
but at best as exploring the structure of cotenability.
I am not claiming that the procedure of positio cannot be used in the
construction of possible worlds. Indeed, my suggestion about the origins
of insolubilia will require just the opposite. A positio in which the
respondent can succeed in avoiding inconsistency despite the best efforts
of a logically omniscient opponent provides a partial valuation of the
sentences of their language. This valuation may be extended by
Lindenbaum's lemma to yield a possible world. The mediaevals did not
know Lindenbaum's lemma but the development of a positio exactly
parallels its proof. The basic intuition is expressed in the rule that an
impossibility cannot follow from a possibility. What positio provides is a
an interpretation of that rule which has it that a proposition is possibly
true only i f it may consistently be supposed to be true. That is to say
there is a consistent valuation in which it is assigned the value true or,
equivalently, some possible world in which the state of affairs that it
describes is actual. Positio used in this way is especially common in
fourteenth century discussions of future contingency.
Notice that the arguments here for the 'cotenability interpretation'
cannot apply to impossible positio. None of our sources provide rules for
concession and denial in such positiones but it would hardly make sense
to allow the introduction of arbitrary contingent truths in reasoning
there. From an impossible positio we may thus read off, that peculiar
being, a true conditional with an impossible antecedent. And this indeed
is what Clarembald takes Boethius to derive from the impossible positio
set out in Quomodo. The resulting counterfactual will not be contingent,
OBLIGATIONS A N D LIARS 73
however, but rather true in the strongest sense of all, the antecedent
contains the consequent.
2. POSITIO A N D P A R A D O X
The aim of the respondent in possible, or false, positio is to avoid being
forced to concede a per se impossibility. That is to say both a
proposition and its contradictory opposite or a proposition like 'a man
is a an ass' in which 'the form of the predicate is naturally repugnant to
the subject thing.'2 4
The respondent is bound to fail i f he starts off by
allowing a positum which is inconsistent. Consider for example a twelfth
century version of Russell's barber. Suppose that as a matter of fact
Socrates is not looking at himself and I posit and it is admitted that
Socrates is looking at all and only men who are not looking at
themselves. I next propose that Socrates is not looking at himself. This
does not follow from the positum and it is true. It should therefore be
conceded. M y respondent is now required to concede both a proposition
and its contradictory opposite. Consequently the positum should not be
accepted.
Propositions and sets of propositions such as this are the topic of the
little treatise De Petitionibus Contrarium. None of the sophisms dealt
with there turn upon the application of semantical terms. They
correspond rather to what in the earlier part of last century were called
the logical paradoxes. The solution to them is perfectly straightforward.
The situation described by the propositions is impossible and so
imponible. The solution offends no intuition and seems to threaten no
theoretical claims.
It is quite otherwise with two other classes of propositions. If I posit
that Socrates utters only the sentence 'what Plato says is false' and that
Plato utters only the sentence 'what Socrates says is true' and I then
propose 'what Plato says is false,' it seems that no consistent response is
possible. Yet the positum is perfectly well formed and could easily
enough be realised in practice. Our first intuition is surely that the
propositum must have a determinate truth-value but a moment's
reflection seems to show that i f it is either true or false, then if is both
true and false. Something deeper is wrong here and Buridan and the rest
of the fourteenth century theoreticians of insolubilia try to save the
intuition at the expense of naive Aristotelian semantics.
Neither TE nor OP notices insolubilia generated in this way but TE
warns of and OP explores an even more pathological phenomenon. In
74 CHRISTOPHER J. M A R T I N
order to generate a Liar paradox we need to find a predicate 'P' uniquely
true of the sentence ' i f a sentence is P, then it is false.' Today we might
use the demonstrative expression 'this sentence' or the Godel code of
the sentence for ' P . ' The second alternative obviously was not available
in the twelfth century and curiously the first seems not to have been
employed. A suitable predicate was available, however, from positio. The
sentence 'the positum is false' is perfectly well formed and true when
uttered by a witness to a false positio. TEF, however, insists that neither
it nor anything convertible with it is acceptable as a positum. The
hypothesis that I would like to propose is that the earliest mediaeval
interest in insolubilia developed out of a concern with avoiding just this
sort of positum. The best evidence for this, I think, is the form taken by
the earliest known solution.
TEF describes the problem created by the enuntiabile that a falsehood
is posited as follows:
For suppose that the enuntiabile that afalsehood is posited could be posited, there
would follow a contradiction in this way if that a falsehood is posited were
posited, and afterwards it were said 'let the time cease' and asked 'was the positum
false or was it true?.' If it was true, therefore that a falsehood is posited was true,
therefore a falsehood was posited. But nothing except that. Therefore that was false.
And that was the positum. Therefore the positum wasfalse. If it was false, therefore
that a falsehood is posited was false. Therefore a falsehood was not posited. But
something was posited. Therefore a truth. But nothing except that. Therefore it was
true and it was said that it was false. On account of this it should be said that this
may not be posited since from its positing there would follow a contradiction.
To draw a parallel with modern work on the Liar let us say that an
enuntiabile is ungrounded with respect to positio just in case it cannot be
consistently assigned a truth value as the positum of a positio. I take it
that the problem with admitting that the positum is false as a positum is
the implication that the positum expresses an enuntiabile. Since an
enuntiabile must be either true or false the proof shows that i f the
sentence is admitted it cannot express an enuntiabile.
We may also say that a sentence is ungrounded in a positio just in
case it cannot be consistently assigned a truth value in that positio.
Buridan, reinterpreting ungroundedness in a positio as what George
Hughes has called 'contextual inconsistency,' will argue that such
sentences are false. The first problem for a respondent in positio is
thus to decide whether he is confronted with a claim of possibility which
when demodalised yields an enuntiabile ungrounded with respect to
positio. OP and TE assume without argument that such enuntiabilia are
OBLIGATIONS A N D LIARS 75
equivalent to that a falsehood is posited. Some simple examples from
TEF are that the positum has the same truth-value as a falsehood and
that the positum has the opposite truth-value to a truth. Let us say that
these enuntiabilia are simply ungrounded with respect to positio. They
cannot be posited by anyone or at any time without becoming circular.
In contrast there are enuntiabilia which are only accidentally
ungrounded with respect to positio. For example that the positum has the
same truth-value as that you are a bishop. This enuntiabile will be
ungrounded with respect to positio just in case you are not a bishop,
which is to say just in case the world happens to be a certain way. The
same holds mutatis mutandis of the disjunction or conjunction of the
enuntiabile that the positum is false with a contingent enuntiabile.
Insisting that the respondent not accept as a positum an enuntiabile
which has 'positum' for it's subject term will not save him. It will
exclude perfectly acceptable enuntiabilia while failing to trap all
insoluble posita. I will justify the qualification 'insoluble' in a moment.
One example mentioned by TE is that Socrates posits a falsehood and
another that a falsehood is conceded. The first is accidentally
ungrounded with respect to a positio in which Socrates is the opponens.
The second certainly describes a possibility since it is true of most well
conducted positiones. Furthermore no inconsistency follows i f we
suppose simply that it is posited. It is ungrounded, however, with respect
to any positio in which it is proposed since as positum it must not be
denied but i f it is conceded, it can no longer be consistently assigned a
truth value. Though TEF does not prove it, it is easy to see that on being
conceded that a falsehood is conceded becomes equivalent to that the
positum is false.
TEF offers no instructions to a respondent for dealing with cases like
this but an appropriate answer can I think be recovered from the
treatment of two other enuntiabilia. The first of them is decidedly
peculiar. The enuntiabile that the positum and the propositum have the
same truth-value can be maintained, according to TEF, i f the casus falls
out in one way but not i f it falls out in another. If the first propositum is
true then the positio is perfectly safe. This, incidentally, shows us, I take
it, how TEF would deal with the truth positing enuntiabile that the
positum is true. If we start of by agreeing to maintain its truth, no
inconsistency can result. On the other hand, that the positum and the
propositum have the same truth-value cannot be posited i f the first
propositum is false. In that case, according to TEF, the positio is
destroyed (interimitur) by the proposal.
76 CHRISTOPHER J. M A R T I N
But what exactly is it that is destroyed. Throughout TEF the
distinction between sentences and enuntiabilia, or dicta, is carefully
observed with the latter picked by means of accusative plus infinitive or
quod constructions. The aim in positio is to answer as i f the posited
enuntiabile were true. Unlike Sherwood, TEF allows that the positum
may be proposed in a different form of words to that in which it was
accepted. If the positio is destroyed, it is because the positum can no
longer be treated as true and this because it can be neither be true nor
false. But in that case the positum sentence can no longer express an
enuntiabile since all there is to being an enuntiabile is being either true
or false. Putting this in more modern terms the problem is that o f
responding to utterances of sentences in situations in which they fail to
express propositions.
TEF does not say how such proposals should be greeted but I think
that it would require that the respondent say 'nugaris' or 'nil dicis,' 'you
aren't saying anything.' This at any rate is what we are told to say to
the propositum 'mulier albus esf in a positio with positum 'hec vox
mulier sit masculini generis.'1
The point is that the metalinguistic
positum says nothing about the gender of albus and we should not give a
reply to the propositum which presupposes its congruity.3 1
If this is the appropriate response for an insoluble positum according
to TE, then it agrees with the OP. Both works maintain that that the
positum is false and anything convertible with it is unacceptable as a
positum but the sophisms that appear in OP are very much more
complicated than those presented in TEF.
For example, prior to Duns Scotus' criticism of the account of time
and modality presupposed by the theory of positio a standard rule was
what we may call 'the Present Instant Principle* (PIP): 'If A is the name
of the present instant, then, i f it is proposed in a false positio, "A exists"
must be denied.' OP thus sophistically proposes that it is possible that I
should concede that A does not exist. This indeed seems eminently
plausible since it is just what I must do in a false positio. Thus,
unsuspecting, I allow it to be posited. Though the dialectic is a little
complicated my opponent can relatively quickly convict me of an
improper response no matter how I reply to his proposals. I attach the
details in an Appendix. What has gone wrong of course is that I have
admitted a proposition simply ungrounded with respect to positio. Here
is the proof: ' i f you should concede that A does not exist, you should
concede a falsehood, and i f you should concede a falsehood, then the
OBLIGATIONS A N D LIARS 77
positum is false' Conversely ' i f the positum is false, that A exists is to be
denied, (and) from this you should concede that A does not exist.'3 2
OP offers the following advice:3 3
... one should consider whether in the time of the positio, on account of one
propositum or another the <positum> might become convertible with that a
falsehood is posited or not. And if it does so so, it should be said that the
<positum> falls <from positio> at the time at which it is convertible with that a
falsehood is posited. Whence if after that time 'stop the time' should be said, or
something be proposed, one should say 'nugaris,' and respond to the proposita as
if there were no positum. For indeed it has then departed (cessit). If it does not
become convertible with that a falsehood is posited in the time of the positio, one
should consider whether an insoluble arises from it and if so then the casus is
terminated for you.
In the exercises which follow OP sophistically proposes that it is
possible that you are a man is repugnant to the positum and what has
been conceded.3 4
Again it certainly looks possible but i f we accept it as
our positum we are by a rather complicated series of proposita led to
embarrassment. The solution is to notice that at a certain point the
positum became convertible with that a falsehood is posited and
thereupon departed (cessit). A t that point we should have replied 'you
are talking nonsense' ('nugaris'). Again I attach the details in an
Appendix.
What has happened, of course, is that the positum sentence has
become ungrounded with respect to positio. The opponent may utter it
but i f he does, he succeeds in saying nothing at all.
Exactly the same may happen in depositio, that form of obligatio in
which one has to respond to proposita as i f the enuntiabile accepted as
the depositum were false. The skill in depositio is essentially that o f
applying modus tollens, of grasping at a glance the antecedents of the
depositum. The hazard is the same as in positio and it will only be
avoided i f one is able to detect propositions that are or will become
ungrounded with respect to depositio by becoming convertible with the
enuntiabile that the depositum is false. OP's description of what happens
here is, however, interestingly different from that which it gives for
positio.
In depositio just as in positio the Parvipontanian machine is a threat
to those who take it seriously. They must not accept as the depositum a
3 5
disjunction of two contradictory opposites:
A necessary (enuntiabile) is not to be accepted in depositio by those upholding the
rule that from an impossibility anything would follow. From this it is clear that a
78 CHRISTOPHER J. M A R T I N
disjunction consisting of contradictory opposites is not deponible. Thus this has to
be disambiguated: let it be deposited that there will be a naval battle or there will
not. If it is intended to deposit the dictum as a disjunction, then the depositio
should be cassed. For, as Aristotle says in the Perihermenias, it is necessary. And
thus the intention is that there should be a determinate depositio. If the depositum
is disjoined, the depositio is to be admitted, whether it comes about determinately
or indeterminately. And a like judgment is to be made of other disjunctions
consisting of contradictory opposites. Those which have for one of the
contradictory opposites a necessary (enuntiabile) and for the other an impossible
(enuntiabile) should be accepted in deposition only for the impossible, unless an
insoluble should prevent this. On account of this the disjunction: that a falsehood
is deposited or not deposited is not deponible, neither for the whole nor for the
parts because that a falsehood is not deposited is per se necessary, that a falsehood
is deposited is impossible and is as well insoluble if it is deposited.
The proof of its insolubility is the standard one. The consequence is
that:3 6
Its depositio, therefore, should be cassed as should that of everything convertible
with it either ut nunc or ut simpliciter.... Furthermore, Other circumstances which
cause insolubles in false positio are also to be cassed in depositio.
In Scotland 'cassed' is still available as a translation of cassatur. It is used
in the law in exactly the right sense of cancellation or annulment. The
solution to the problem of propositions ungrounded with respect to
positio or depositio found in OP and TE is thus cassatio, apparently the
earliest of the solutions to the Liar. The word is certainly cassatio rather
than quassatio?1
What is proposed is cancellation and annulment not
shaking and breaking. The terminology of obligationes indeed reeks of
the law and it would certainly be worthwhile to investigate late twelfth
century thinking about legal disputation as a source for the structure
adopted in regimenting the logical procedure.
It seems to me that it makes much more sense to speak of
cancellation or annulment with respect to a positio than it does apart
from that context. I would thus suggest not only that twelfth century
logicians first became aware of insolubles via obligations but also that
they developed their first solution in terms of them. To see what that
solution really amounts to, however, we must now turn finally to what
seems to the oldest surviving treatise entirely devoted to insolubility, the
Insolubilia Monacensis (IM), which is preserved in the same manuscript
as TEF and TEL
OBLIGATIONS A N D LIARS 79
3. INSOLUBILIA, CASSATIO, A N D T R U T H V A L U E GAPS
Like both TE and OP, IM is careful to maintain a clear distinction
between the propositional content expressed in the assertive utterance
of an indicative sentence, that is the enuntiabile, or dictum, and the
sentence itself, the propositio. Strictly speaking, according to IM, the
enuntiabile that what I assert is false is not insoluble. It would only be so
if no appropriate answer could be given to someone proposing it. IM
does not explicitly appeal to positio here but clearly needs it to
guarantee that this is the only thing that I say.3 8
In such a positio that
what I assert is false is ungrounded. However, far from there being no
suitable response to someone who proposes only this, IM claims that it,
and any questions that may be asked about it, can be answered. The
questions suggested are: Ms what I assert false?', 'is what I assert true?',
'do I assert anything?'. We are not told the answers but we will see that
they must be 'no,' 'no' and 'no.'
Like later treatments of insolubilia IM appeals to the Aristotelian
distinction between being X without qualification and being X in some
qualified way. The later treatments will have the Liar sentence false
simpliciter but true secundum quid. IM on the other hand has it insoluble
simpliciter but soluble secundum quid. What is meant, I think, is that
neither 'verwm est' nor ^falsum esf is an appropriate response but
nevertheless there is one. This, I suppose, is arguably evidence that the
solutions which apply Aristotle's distinction to truth and falsity had not
been developed when IM was written.
IM goes on to claim that enuntiabilia insoluble secundum quid are all
characterised by circularity: 'what is insoluble is a circular and necessary
deduction to both sides of a contradiction.'3 9
It follows from its account
of the significant use of sentences that there are three ways in which an
enuntiabile might force itself to go round in circles. IM distinguishes
between enuntiabilia, the physical and mental acts involved in
presenting enuntiabilia to ourselves and others, and the results of those
acts, the token physical, or mental, embodiment of the enuntiabilia. For
example, in an act of assertion I assert the enuntiabile that snow is white
by uttering a token of the sentence 'snow is white' assertively.
That snow is white is of course perfectly straight. For there to be the
possibility of a circular deduction the enuntiabile must in some way refer
to one of the three elements required to make it manifest—the
enuntiabile itself, the act in which it is made manifest, and the sentence
which manifests it. For example in asserting that I assert a falsehood I
80 CHRISTOPHER J. M A R T I N
refer, or try to refer, to the act of assertion and so long as the only thing
that I utter is the corresponding sentence the circular deduction of both
parts of a contradiction is immediate. IM proposes in effect that an
enuntiabile of the form that what 1 X is false is simply insoluble with
respect to the act of ^Ing. Thus that what I concede is false is simply
insoluble with respect to conceding and that what I think is false with
respect to the mental act of thinking.
According to IM, the solution secundum quid to the problem o f
responding to speech acts of the form 'what I X is false' is to realise that
with such an utterance I cannot X on pain of circularity. With it posited,
of course, that this is the only thing that I say out loud, i f X is a physical
speech act, or say to myself, i f it is a mental speech act. The
appropriate response is thus to say 'you aren't .Ying anything.' In
general we must cass the act of Xmg just as we cass the act of positing
when the proposed positum is ungrounded with respect to positio.
While cassing seemed to make good sense in the context of a positio
it is rather less clear what it amounts to here. IM goes on to offer an
argument in favour of the objection that in asserting that what I assert is
false I must assert something:4 0
To assert something is none other than first to judge and then to utter. But the
judgement is not to be cassed, since from it no embarrassment would follow. For
suppose that someone judges but does not utter and one may with impunity
maintain that it (i.e. the enuntiabile) is false. Similarly the utterance is not to be
cassed nor is it usual to cass it. And so since neither the judgement nor the
utterance is to be cassed and these two are assertion, the assertion is not to be
cassed.
IM's solution parallels the account of the negation of implications found
in the treatise de Implicationibus in the same manuscript. Neither
assertion nor utterance alone is to be cassed but rather the one in respect
of the other. That is to say, I take it, that when I respond to your words
with 'nil diets' my claim is that you failed to achieve the combination o f
judgement and utterance necessary for assertion.
As it stands the solution is entirely schematic and ad hoc—assertion
succeeds except when it cannot. Furthermore the enuntiabile itself still
seems to be insoluble secundum quid. Since, surely, i f I fail to assert
anything with an assertive utterance of 'what I assert is false,' then the
enuntiabile that what I assert is false is false etc. Whether IM has an
answer will turn upon what it supposes an enuntiabile to be. If it can
show that somehow there is no enuntiabile in this case, then perhaps it
does have an answer. Here we need to know more about IM's theory o f
OBLIGATIONS A N D LIARS 81
meaning. The question of the nature of enuntiabilia is raised directly but
it is hard to see whether the answer helps with our problem:4 1
... the appellation 'that a human being runs' stands for an enuntiabile. Suppose it
is asked what that is, whether a thing or an expression or an understanding. In so
far as we are dealing with insolubilia, we should maintain that an enuntiabile is an
understanding or a conjunction of things or of understandings.
Later, addressing the problem of the insolubility that arises when an
enuntiabile is in some way about the enuntiabile itself, IM develops this
point a little in a version of Grelling's paradox almost identical with that
presented recently by Tyler Burge.4 2
Unlike Burge, however, IM is
happy to solve the paradox by forcing a gap between truth and falsity
even here:4 3
... the third species of insoluble <is that> which comes from the existence of the
insoluble. And for this reason the enuntiabile should be cassed. But in cassing the
enuntiabile we do not cass the substantial but rather the accidental. Granted that an
enuntiabile is a thing or an understanding, nevertheless it is not a thing nor an
understanding which is cassed but rather a conjunction of things or understandings.
For since the conjunction of things or understandings is enuntiabile and that is
accidental, the enuntiabile may indeed be cassed.
To cass an enuntiabile it seems that we must say that it is not an
enuntiabile {'Propter hoc debet did quod non est enuntiabile')?* Is
there a confusion here between the enuntiabile as an understanding and
what it is that may be asserted, a combination of things or
understandings and presumably of things and understandings? Perhaps the
intended answer is a development of the familiar notion of semantic
congruity. A n enuntiabile is an understanding consisting of a
combination of understandings of things or, presumably, o f
understandings. A combination which cannot occur cannot be understood
and in consequence cannot constitute an enuntiabile.
Whatever the details of their epistemology and semantics the cassers
have in effect provided a truth-gap solution to the problem of insoluble
sentences. Assertive utterances may be either true or false or say nothing
at all. Let me conclude by considering briefly how well they understood
the demands of this kind of solution.
A n account the Liar should do its best not to offend too many of our
intuitions about meaningfulness and truth. While the claim that i f I say
only 'what I say is false,' I really say nothing at all perhaps conflicts
with a general intuition about the meaningfulness of well-formed
sentences, it seems to accord well with our intuitions about this particular
instance. If the author of the treatise on insolubles in B . N . Lat. 11.412
82 CHRISTOPHER J. M A R T I N
is to be believed it also agrees with the intuitions of the rusticus whose
opinion is canvased there.
Our intuitions about a sentence like 'this sentence is in English' are
quite different and it would be highly offensive to them to propose that
in uttering it I am merely babbling. IM does not deal with such sentences
but presumably would have to assign this one to the truths. More
problematic is the 'truth-teller,' the enuntiabile that what I assert is true,
which locates itself exactly at the point at which our intuitions about the
connection between meaningfulness and truth-value become unsure. It is
certainly not paradoxical but i f we assign it a truth-value we are led
immediately back to that assignment in an infinite circle. IM agrees that
the sentence is not insoluble in the sense that a contradiction follows
from it but against indifference it offers an argument from symmetry.
Suppose that of two people hearing the sentence one remarks that it is
false and the other that it is true. They cannot both be right so they
must both be wrong. Some grant the argument, IM tells us, and consign
the enuntiabile to the insolubilia and the utterance, presumably, to
those with which nothing is said. That is perhaps the best thing to do
with it since there can be no matter of fact to settle its truth-value. IM
does not agree. Prior to the utterance of the corresponding sentence the
enuntiabile is surely false. When it is uttered it either remains false or it
becomes true. The argument presumably is that it certainly doesn't
become both true and false and unlike the Liar there is no reason to
suppose that it becomes neither. It seems that the enuntiabile is either
true or false but we cannot say, or even know, which.
Though solutions like cassatio can reasonably claim to have
dispatched the Liar they can never rest content in their victory. Rather
they must be perpetually on guard against an army of its fortified
descendents threatening to pour through the gap. One such descendent
arrives to take up the challenge in IM. In an objection to the rule that i f
an insoluble is disjunctively combined with a true enuntiabile the
disjunction is true but if with a false enuntiabile the whole is insoluble we
are introduced to the Son of the Liar:4 5
The enuntiabile that I assert somethingfalse or that I assert nothing is either true
or it is false. If it is true, but it is not true on account of the part: that I assert
nothing, therefore it is true on account of this part: that I assert something false;
therefore it is true that I assert something false, therefore I assert something false,
and nothing except this, therefore this is false, and it was said to be true. If it is
false, therefore in virtue of both parts, therefore in virtue of this one: that I assert
somethingfalse, therefore it is false that I assert something false, therefore I do not
OBLIGATIONS A N D LIARS 83
assert something false, and I assert something, therefore something true, and
nothing but this, therefore it is true and it was said to be false.
But what about the possibility that I assert nothing with an utterance of
the sentence? IM notes that that is just what is usually said but seems to
tire of difficulty here. It follows, it claims, that if I assert nothing, then
the disjunction that I assert is true. But then, of course, i f the disjunction
is true, it is not true and i f it is not true, it is true. A l l IM has to say is
that its rule was not intended to cover disjunctions like this in which the
same act appears in both disjuncts. Though it runs through the proof, it
seems not to notice that in agreeing that I say nothing with this
disjunction it has handed victory over to the Son of the Liar.
What would an appropriate resolution be? Recent gappy accounts of
the Liar have suggested a number but all seem to be objectionable in one
way or another. In any event the critics of the cassers did not trumpet
the return of the Liar. Rather, conflating assertion and utterance, they
contented themselves with the facile request that we read their lips for a
refutation of cassatio46
. This, of course, would not have impressed the
cassers but exactly what the details of their semantical theory were we
cannot yet say. Until that problem is solved we will not be able to fully
evaluate their analysis of the Liar. Let us hope that it can be solved, and
soon, since cassatio is arguably the most interesting and certainly the
least contrived of the mediaeval treatments of the test case for
semantical theories.
APPENDIX: T W O SOPHISMS F R O M T H E
OBLIGATIONES PARISIENSES
I give these two examples to illustrate not only the points made in the
text but also the complexity of obligational exchanges. As respondens
your aim is to avoid conceding a set of proposita from which a
contradiction follows. These two sophisms show how difficult this may
be to do in practice.
Sophism 1: It is possible that you should concede that A does not exist.
1. It is possible that a possible falsehood is posited.
2. If a possible falsehood is posited, then you should deny that A exists.
3. If you should deny that A exists, you should concede that A does
not exist.
84 CHRISTOPHER J. M A R T I N
4. Therefore it is possible that you should concede that A does not
exist.
Let the possibility be posited:
Let Q be 'A exists.'
The Positum (Po), is 'you should concede that not Q.'
Let the time of obligation cease.
0. Po was true—>Po was false Claim.
[Proof:]
1. Po was true Hypothesis.
2. Q was true Positio took place at A.
3. Q was not repugnant to Po A truth is not repugnant to a truth.
4. You should not have 3, rules for positio.
denied Q
5. You should not have 4, rules for positio.
conceded that not Q
6. 'You should concede that 5, quotation.
not Q' was false
7. Po was false 6, substitution.
8. Po was false—>Po was true Claim.
[Proof:]
9. Po was a possible Hypothesis.
falsehood
10. If a possible falsehood is PIP.
posited you should deny Q
11. You should have denied Q 9, 10.
12. You should have conceded 11, rule for positio.
not Q
13. 'You should have conceded 12, quotation.
not Q ' was true
14. Po was true 13, substitution.
Sophism 10: It is possible that you are a man is repugnant to the
positum and what has been conceded.
Let it be posited.
Let Q be 'you are a man.'
Let C a t step n be the conjunction of everything conceded before step n.
Let Prs be the z'th propositum.
Let R(P, Q) be T is repugnant to Q:
The positum, Po, is ' R ( g , (Po & C ) . '
OBLIGATIONS A N D LIARS 85
0. Q is repugnant Po & C
[Proof:]
1. Only this, indicating the
sentence displayed at 0,
has been posited.
Not Prt
Po (the positum).
?xx (the first proposition).
Suppose that the respondens
denies Pri.
3.
4.
5.
6.
Let the time of obligation
cease.
You have denied something P ^ is true
true which is not repugnant
to the positum so you have
responded badly.
Pri
No truth has been denied
7. No falsehood has been
conceded
8. Let the time of obligation
cease.
9. At step 8 Po was either
true or false.
10. Po was true—>Po was false
[Proof:]
11. Po was true
12. C was true
13. Q is true
14. Q was not repugnant to
(Po & C)
15. ' Q is repugnant to
(Po & Cy was false
16. Po was false.
17. Po was false—>Po was true
[Proof:]
18. Po was false
Suppose that P ^ is
conceded by the respondens.
Pr2 . True and not repugnant to
what has already been conceded
so it should be conceded by
the respondens.
Pr3 . True and not repugnant to
what has already been conceded
so it should be conceded by the
respondens
At step 8: C = Prj& Pr2 & Pr3 .
Claim.
Hypothesis.
5, 6, 7.
The respondens is a man.
Truth is not
repugnant to truth.
14, Quotation.
Substitution.
Claim.
Hypothesis.
86 CHRISTOPHER J. M A R T I N
19. (Po & C) -> not Q (i) To be proved.
20. Q is repugnant to Po & C 19 instantiates the definition of
repugnance.
21. Po was true 20, quotation.
It remains to prove (i): (R(Q, (Po & C)) & C) not Q
SO. (R(Q, (Po & O) & C) ^ Claim.
not £
[Proof:]
SI. R(Q, (Po & C)) & C Hypothesis.
S2. 'fl(0, (Po & C))' is true SI, Simplification and quotation.
S3. Only 'R(Q, (Po & C))' Prj, conceded at stage 1
is posited of the main argument.
S4. Po is true S2, S3, substitution.
S5. Prj is true. Stage 5 of the main argument,
quotation.
S6. Pr2 is true. Stage 6 of the main argument,
quotation.
S7. Pr3 is true. Stage 7 of the main argument,
quotation.
S8. Q is repugnant to truth S2, S4, S5, S6, S7.
S9. Q is false Whatever is repugnant to truth is
false.
S10. not Q S9, disquotation.
Solution: 'Thepositio (Po) is to be accepted and the proposita (Prj, Pr2 ,
Pr3 ) are to be conceded. But when (the opponens) says "let the time of
obligation cease" after the last concession (i.e. at stage 8 of the main
argument) you should say "nugaris" because (the positio) ceases in the
time of the last concession and in "let the time etc" (the positum) is
convertible with "the positum is false.'"
Proof that the positum is convertible with 'the positum is false':
NO. Po is false <—»• Claim.
R(Q, (Po & C))
[Proof:]
N l . R(Q,(Po8cC)) Claim.
Po is false
[Proof:]
N2. R(Q, (Po & C)) Hypothesis.
OBLIGATIONS A N D LIARS 87
N 3 . R(n truth, (Po & C)) Q is true.
N4. Po is false or C is false N2, definition of repugnance,
De Morgan.
N5. Po is false C is not false, disjunctive
syllogism.
N6. Po is false —• Claim.
*(Q, (Po & O )
[Proof:]
N7. Po is false Hypothesis.
N8. S —> not Q N7, modus ponens, since the conditional
is true and necessary (ii)
and a necessity follows from
anything. Where S is the
conjunction at any stage of the
positum and concessa.
N9. R(Q> S) N8, definition of repugnance.
N10. S = (Po & C) As soon as Pr3 is conceded.
N i l . R(Q, (Po & C)) N9, N10, substitution.
(ii) is not proved in OP but the following is presumably what is intended.
('ST is at any stage '(Po & C)'):
CO. (Po & C) not Q Claim.
[Proof:]
C I . P o Hypothesis.
C2. C Hypothesis.
C3. R(Q, (Po, C)) C I , stating Po.
C4. (Po & C) —> not Q C3, definition of repugnance.
C5. not Q C I , C2, C4, modus ponens.
C6. (Po & C) —• not Q C I , C2, conditionalisation.
Note that while C6 is equivalent to C3, C3 holds only under the two
hypotheses which have been discharged to obtain C6.
Since S becomes equal to (Po & Q at the moment P r 3 is conceded,
'up until then the positum may remain, but in the moment of last
concession it falls.'
For the Latin text see de Rijk 1975; sophism 1, p. 33; sophism 10,
pp. 40-41.
University ofAuckland
88 CHRISTOPHER J. M A R T I N
NOTES
1
See de Rijk 1966; Spade 1973, 292-309; Spade 1987, 24-46.
2
See in particular Spade 1987, which discusses St Paul's letter to Titus, Gellius'
Nodes Atticae, Cicero's Academica, and Augustine's Contra Academicos, The
earliest use of the distinction between being X simpliciter and being X secundum
quid in the solution of the Liar seems to date from the beginning of the thirteenth
century. There is much disagreement over the appropriate X.
3
Kripke 1975, 690-716.
4
For the beginnings of an account of the different logics invented in the twelfth
century see Martin 1988.
5
OP, 52.10-11:" ... impossibile ponendum est ut videatur quid inde sequatur"; cf.
TEI, 117.28-31; "Quod impossibilis positio habeat sustineri sic probatur. Sicuti
enim nos dicimus quod possibile est concedendum ut videatur quid inde sequitur,
similiter habemus ab Aristotile quod impossibile est concedendum ut videtur quid
inde accidat. " TEF, 103.21-23 gives the justification for postio possibilis, which
it calls positio falsi, or positio falsa.
6
Boethius 1969, I, ii, 5-6 (PL 64, 833D): "Sed quoniam de hypotheticis
loquimur, quid significet hypothesis praedicendum est. Hypothesis namque, unde
hypothetici syllogismi accepere vocabulum, duobus (ut Eudemo placet) dicitur
modis: aut enim tale adquiescitur aliquid per quamdam inter se consentientium
conditionem, quod fieri nullo modo possit, ut ad suum terminum ratio perducatur;
aut in conditione posita consequentia vi coniunctionis vel disiunctionis ostenditur.
Ac prioris quidem propositionis exemplum est, veluti cum res omnes corporales
materiae formaeque concursu subsistere demonstramus. Tunc enim quod per rerum
naturam fieri non potest ponimus, id est omnem formae naturam a subiecta materia,
si non in re, saltern in cogitatione separamus; et quoniam nihil ex rebus corporeis
reliquum fit, demonstratum atque ostensum putamus eisdem convenientibus
corporalium rerum substantiam confici, quibus a se disiunctis ac discedentibus
interimatur. In hoc igitur exemplo posita consentiendi conditione, ut id paulisper
fieri intelligatur quod fieri non potest, id est ut formae a materia separentur, quid
consequatur intendimus, perire scilicet corpora, ut eadem ex iisdem consistere
comprobemus."
7
Garlandus Compotista 1959, 127.7-8: " . . . quando aliquid impossibile conceditur
ut "homo est lapis", gratia videndi a quern finem ratio perveniat..."
8
Abaelard 1970, Dialectica IV, 1, p. 471.28-30: "Per consensum autem et
concessionem hypothesis propositio ilia dicitur quae non in se vera recipitur, sed
gratia argumentandi conceditur, ut quid ex ea possit extrahi videatur..."
* Thierry of Chartres 1971, 421.24; 423.76, and Clarembald of Arras 1965,
212.4sq.
1 0
See Martin 1988.
1 1
SeeNormore 1987. Abaelard considers the claim that nothing grows and agrees
that it is true if you identify a thing with its integral parts and by growth you mean
that it undergoes a multiplication of these parts. His response is that this is not the
proper way to understand growth. To mark growth we must locate something that
remains fixed as extra parts are added. What remains fixed, Abaelard claims, is at
some level of generality the kind of composite. Thus if to a heap of three stones I
OBLIGATIONS A N D LIARS 89
add a fourth, the heap of stones grows but the heap of three stones does not. If I
add a horse to a collection of three men the size of the collection of animals
increases. If God adds matter to the flesh of a child, the child becomes larger.
Abaelard's view seems to me to be exactly the opposite of that constructed for him
by Normore. He holds, to use Normore's terminology, but not I think his own,
that things certainly grow but that growth only occurs where some status remains
the same.
1 2
Jacques of Vitry 1914; cf. exemplum 105, p. 62.
1 3
Spade and Stump 1983.
1 4
See Martin 1988. Spade and Stump 1983, n. 22, also make a curious mistake in
supposing that 'dubie* is the answer to be given when one is in doubt. It is rather
the form of the answer. One responds doubtfully by giving the answer 'proba!.'
What we have here is not, as they suggest, a new and an old terminology but
simply the standard response and a description of it. See for example OP, 46.24-7:
"Si dicat ad hanc 'Antichristus est coloratus,' 'proba!': cedat tempus. Petitum erat
ut non responderes dubie ad aliquid nisi ad quod directe obligatus esses ad
dubitandum."
1 5
But see Yagisawa 1988.
1 6
Spade 1982.
1 7
Stump 1981.
1 8
Curiously, something more like 'would' counterfactual reasoning is found in
OP's very brief account, p. 28.3-8, of the way in which one resonds in the species
of obligation known as l
rei Veritas.'1
If it has been established in rei veritate that
the Antichrist exists and it is then proposed that the Antichrist is white, the proper
response is 'proba!.' The Antichrist would certainly have a colour but we cannot
say which colour. In a positio with the corresponding positum the appropriate
response would be falsum esV since, according to OP, in positio a propositum
which is impertinens is to be denied. Rei Veritas thus perhaps anticipates
Kilvington's notorious response to Sophism 47.
1 9
Spade 1982, 11.
20
OP, 31.13-27.
21
Pace Normore 1987, 204. The principles are equivalent, however, if the
Nominales accept the equivalence of 'P —* (P & Q)' and 'P —* Q.' In the the
example given the Nominales might perhaps have cited the principle that a
conjunction of an affirmative and a negative is negative and their general rule that a
negative does not follow from an affirmative. OP, however, states the objection as
a general one and so as holding presumably for affirmative P and Q with Po = P
and Pri = (P & Q). For the Nominales' account of the quality of compounds see
Martin 1988.
22
I should emphasise that I am not claiming that positio was intended to provide a
model of 'might' counterfactual reasoning. The treatment of irrelevant falsehoods
means that it is no more useful for that purpose than for 'would' counterfactual
reasoning.
See for a start the introduction to Harper, Stalnaker and Pearce 1981.
24
TEF, 113.12-21.
2 5
De Rijk 1976.
90 CHRISTOPHER J. M A R T I N
26
If you concede the propositum, I argue: If it is true that what Plato says is false,
then what Socrates says is true, since he says only that what Plato says is false, but
if what Socrates says is true, then what Plato says is true since he says only that
what Socrates says is true. If on the other hand you deny the propositum, I argue: If
it is false that what Plato says is false, then what Socrates says is true, since Plato
says only that what Socrates says is true, but if what Socrates says is true, then
what Plato says is false.
2 7
Eleonore Stump has suggested on a number of occasions that there is a
connection between the sophisms found in texts on obligations and insolubilia.
She is obviously right about TE and OP but in the examples she gives from
Sherwood the reference to the respondent in the posita is quite accidental. The
opponent needs to find a positum or propositum which will change its truth value
while the positio is in progress. He could watch the clock but its a lot easier to fix
on the utterances of the respondent. See Stump 1980, 249-264.
28
TEF, 104.7-15: "Dato enim quod hoc enuntiabile 'falsum poni' possit poni,
inde sequitur contradictio, si ponatur falsum poni, et postea dicatur 'cedat tempus.'
Et queratur. Positum aut fuit falsum aut fuit verum. Si verum ergo verum fuit
falsum poni. Ergo falsum ponebatur. Et nichil nisi hoc. Ergo hoc fuit falsum. Et
hoc fuit positum. Ergo positum fuit falsum. Si falsum, ergo falsum fuit falsum
poni. Ergo falsum non ponebatur. Et ponebatur aliquid. Ergo verum. Sed nichil
nisi hoc. Ergo fuit verum. Et dictum <est> quod falsum. Propter hoc debet dici
quod hoc non potest poni cum ex eius positione sequatur contradictio."
* Hughes 1982, esp. 18 sq.
3 0
Neither TE nor OP considers the yet more pathological enuntiabile: that the
propositum isfalse which can neither be posited nor proposed without circularity.
1
TEF, 110, is here dealing with the problem of how one should answer a quaestio
disciplinalis such as quid? or quare? in a positio. It describes the respondens under
such circumstances as being in an apparentia-somethmg that seems like the truth
but isn't so. This unusual word is used as an alternative to fantasia' by the
Summa Sophisticomm Elenchorum and in the Fallaciae Parvipontanae in giving
the division of sophisms according to Alexander.' Both texts are included in De
Rijk 1962. Apparently alluding to Top., VIII, 156a7, but giving Aristotle' s advice
to the respondent rather than the opponent, TEF maintains that in such cases the
respondent should refuse to answer the question 'quia debet celari rei Veritas in
falsa positione' 'Nugaris' as used by TE does not seem to be connected with
refutation by nugatio as described in Soph. El. 3, 165b 15.
32
OP, 33.19-26.
33
OP, 36.16-32: My suggestions for emendations are marked *<>* a suggested
addition, or change, *[]* a suggested deletion: "Praeterea, Quoddam enuntiabile
potest poni et permanere positum et *<non>* cadere a positione, ut 'Sortes est
albus'; quoddam potest poni et permanere positum sed *[non}* potest cadere a
positione, ut 'falsum positum *<concedere>*' [edn. 'cadere'] et quodlibet
convertibile cum illo. Unde quotiens intendit aliquis ponere, diligenter
considerandum est an sit convertibile cum falsum poni annon. Et si sic, non
recipiatur. Vel si fiat, positione facta, simile vel convertibile, similiter non
recipi<a>tur. Si vero non sit nec fiat, recipi<a>tur et turn consideretur an in
tempore positionis propter propositum aliquod vel aliud fiat convertibile cum
OBLIGATIONS A N D LIARS 91
'falsum poni.' Et si sic, dicendum quod cadit in eodem tempore positum in quo
fiiit convertibile cum 'falsum poni.' Quare si post illud tempus dicat: 'cedat
tempus* vel proponat aliqua, dicendum: 'nugaris' et ad proposita respondenum est
ac si positum non fuerit. Iam enim cessit. Si vero non fiat convertibile cum falsum
poni in tempore positionis, considerandum est an ex ea fit insolubile et si sic,
casus tibi terminatur,"
34
OP, 40, reading 'repugnare' for De Rijk's 'respondere'
35
OP, 48.17-32: "Praeterea. Sustinentibus hanc regulam quod ex impossibili
sequatur quidlibet, necessarium non est recipiendum in depositione. Et ex eodem
patet quod disiuncta constans ex contradictorie oppositis non est deponibilis. Unde
distinguenda est hec: deponatur navale bellum fore vel non fore. Et si dictum
disiuncte intendat deponere, cassetur depositio. Est enim necessarium, ut dicit
Aristotiles in Perihermenias. Et sic fit determinata depositio secundum
intentionem. Si depositum disiungatur, admittenda est depositio, sive fiat
determinate sive indeterminate. Simile Judicium est de aliis disiunctis constantibus
ex contradictorie oppositis. Que autem habent unum contradictorie oppositorum
necessarium, alterum impossibile, pro impossibili tantum recipiatur in depositione,
nisi impediat insolubile. Et propter hoc hec disiuncta: 'falsum deponi vel non
deponi,' non est deponibilis nec pro toto nec pro partibus, quia hec per se est
necessaria: falsum non deponi, hec autem est impossibilis: falsum deponi; et cum
hoc est insolubile si deponatur."
36
OP, 49.7-12: "Cassetur ergo eius depositio et omnis convertibilis cum ipsa, vel
ut nunc vel ut simpliciter. Ut nunc, ut deponatur depositum esse dissimile te sedere
et contingit te sedere in rei veritate. Simpliciter, ut deponatur depositum esse
dissimile *dictum esse. Praeterea. Alie circumstantie que causant insolubile in falsa
positione, cassande sunt etiam in depositione." (*Should this be 'Deum
esse'—something always true? 'Dictum esse' will be true if there is a depositum but
whether it is true simpliciter will depend on the theory of dicta at work.)
3 7
As it is appears in the treatise on Insolubilia in B. N . Lat 11.412 excerpted in
De Rijk 1966. 'Cassatio' is a very uncommon term. l
Cassare' is more common
and interestingly is used by Abaelard 1970, III. 1, p. 255.31-34, in just the right
sense to describe the way in which a 'formally' good consecution 'can in no way be
cancelled (cassariy by a uniform substitution of terms.
3 8
The description of insolubilia in the tract in B. N . Lat. 11.412 is much more
explicitly formulated in terms of positio, De Rijk 1966, 94: "Et ut melius pateat
quod querendum est, faciamus deductiones ad hanc propositionem: 'ego dico
falsum.' Si dicatur quod verum est, sequitur: hoc est verum, et ego dico hoc; ergo
ego dico verum; ergo ego non dico falsum; ergo hec est falsa: 'ego dico falsum'; et
concessisti *<quod>* verum, ergo male;—si dicatur quod falsum, hoc est falsum,
et ego dico hoc; ergo ego dico falsum; ergo hec est vera: 'ego dico falsum'; et
concessisti *<quod falsum>* ergo male."
IM, 105,12-13; "... insolubile est ad utrumque partem contradictionis circularis
et necessaria deductio."
IM 106.3-8: "Sed contra. Dicere nil aliud est quam prius asserere et postea
proferre. Sed assertio non est cassanda, cum ex ipsa non sequatur inconveniens.
Dato enim quod asseratur et non proferatur, inpune potest sustineri quod sit falsum.
92 CHRISTOPHER J. M A R T I N
Similiter prolatio non est cassanda nec solet cassari. Et ita cum assertio non sit
cassanda Dec prolatio et ista duo sint dicere, dictio non est cassanda."
41
IM, 106.18-22; "Et cum tractandum sit de enuntiabilibus insolubilibus, potest
queri quid sit enuntiabile. Verbi gratia, hec appellatio hominem currere supponit
enuntiabile. Queratur quid sit id, sive res sive voces, sive intellectus. Secundum
quod tractandum est de insolubilibus, sustineamus quod enuntiabile sit intellectus
sive coniunctio rerum sive intellectuum."
4 2
Compare: Burge 1979, 169-98: "Suppose I conduct you into a room in which
the open sentence type 'it is not true of itself is written on the blackboard.
Pointing at the expression, I present the following reasoning: Let us consider it as
an argument for its own variable or pronoun. Suppose it is true of itself. Then since
it is the negation of the self-predication of the notion of being true of, it is not true
of itself. Now suppose it is not true of itself. Then since it is the negation of the
self predication of the notion of being true of it is true of itself." And IM,
115.9—17: "Dato enim quod hoc esset enuntiabile: aliquid non es*<se>* [edn. 'est'
] verum pro se, inde sequitur contradictio sic: hoc aut est verum pro se aut non est
verum pro se; si est verum pro se *[non]* ergo ei convenit suus predicates; sed
suus predicatus est non es*<se>* [edn. 'est' ] verum pro se; ergo ei convenit non
esse verum pro se; ergo non est verum pro se; et dictum est quod verum; — si non
est verum pro se, sed est verum pro omni eo cui convenit suus predicatus; sed suus
predicatus convenit ei; ergo est verum pro se; et dictum est quod non est verum pro
se. Propter hoc debet dici quod non est enuntiabile."
43
IM, 115.4-9: "Sequitur de tertia specie insolubilium. Que provenit ex essentia
insolubilis. Et propter hoc debet cassari enuntiabile. Sed cassando enuntiabile non
cassatur substantiate, sed accidentale. Licet enim enuntiabile sit res vel intellectus,
tamen non cassantur res vel intellectus, sed coniunctio rerum vel intellectuum.
Cum enim coniunctio rerum sit enuntiabile et ilia sit accidentalis, enuntiabile bene
potest cassari."
IM, 115.17.
45
IM, 111.9-19: "Hoc enuntiabile, me dicere falsum vel nil dicere, aut est verum
aut est falsum. Si verum, sed non est verum ratione istius partis, me nil dicere;
ergo est verum ratione istius partis, me dicere falsum; ergo verum est me dicere
falsum; ergo ego dico falsum; et nil nisi hoc; ergo hoc est falsum; et dictum est
quod verum; — si falsum, ergo ratione utriusque partis; ergo ratione istius, me
dicere falsum; ergo falsum est me dicere falsum; ergo ego non dico falsum, et dico
aliquid; ergo verum; et nil nisi hoc; ergo hoc est verum; et dictum est quod falsum.
Et ita cum hoc sit quoddam verum, me nil dicere secundum commune iudicium
respectu huius enuntiabilis, verum est me dicere falsum *<vel nil dicere>*. Hie
verum enuntiabile disiungitur ab insolubile et tamen ex responsione illius sequitur
contradictio." The point of the penultimate sentence—and the emendation—is that
the the common view is that me nil dicere is true with respect to the disjunction of
which it is one of the disjuncts. The whole disjunction is thus true.
4 6
See P. V . Spade 1973, 307-8.
OBLIGATIONS A N D LIARS 93
ABBREVIATIONS
fEF =
Tractatus emmeranus de falsi positione, published in De Rijk 1974;
translated below in the appendix.
JEJ- Tractactus emmeranus de impossibili positione, published in De Rijk 1974;
translated below in the appendix.
TE = TEF + TEI
OP = Obligationes parisienses, published in De Rijk 1975.
]M = Insolubilia monacensis published in De Rijk 1966.
REFERENCES
Abaelard, Peter, 1970. Dialectica, (ed.) L. M. de Rijk, Assen, Van Gorcum.
Boethius, A. M . S., 1969. De Hypotheticis Syllogismis, (ed.) L. Obertello,
Brescia, Paedia.
Burge, Tyler, 1979. "Semantical Paradox," Journal of Philosophy 76, 169-98
Clarembald of Arras 1965. "Expositio Super Librum Boetii 'De Hebdomadibus,'"
in Nikolaus Haring (ed.), Life and Works of Clarembald of Arras, Toronto,
Pontifical Institute of Mediaeval Studies.
De Rijk, Lambertus Marie, 1962. Logica Modemorum, vol. 1, Assen, Van
Gorcum.
De Rijk, Lambertus Marie, 1966. "Some notes on the Mediaeval tract De
insolubilibus, with the edition of a tract dating from the end of the twelfth
century," Vivarium 4, 83-115.
De Rijk, Lambertus Marie, 1974. "Some Thirteenth Century Tracts on the Game of
Obligation I," Vivarium 12, 94-123.
De Rijk, Lambertus Marie, 1975. "Some Thirteenth Century Tracts on the Game of
Obligation II," Vivarium 13, 22-54.
De Rijk, Lambertus Marie, 1976. "Some Thirteenth Century Tracts on the Game of
Obligation III," Vivarium 14, 26-49.
Garlandus Compotista 1959. Dialectica, (ed.) L. M. de Rijk, Assen, Van Gorcum.
Harper, W. L., Stalnaker, R., and Pearce, G., (eds.) 1981. Ifs, Dordrecht, Reidel.
Hughes, George, 1982. John Buridan on Self Reference: Chapter Eight of
Buridan's Sophismata, (An Edition and a Translation with an Introduction and a
Philosophical Commentary), Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Jacques of Vitry 1914. Die Exempla des Jakob von Vitry, (ed.) Joseph Graven,
Heidelberg, Carl Winter.
Kripke, Saul, 1975. "Outline of a Theory of Truth," The Journal of Philosophy 72,
690-716.
Martin, Christopher J., 1988. "Embarrassing Arguments and Surprising
Conclusions in the Development of the Theory of the Conditional in the
Twelfth Century," in J. Jolivet & A. de Libera (eds.), Gilbert de Poitiers et ses
Contemporains, Naples, Bibliopolis, 377-401.
Normore, Calvin, 1987, "Medieval Nominalism," in J. Wippel (ed.), Studies in
Medieval Philosophy, Washington D. C , Catholic University of America Press.
94 CHRISTOPHER J, M A R T I N
Spade, Paul Vincent, 1973. "The Origins of the Mediaeval Insolubilia Literature,"
Franciscan Studies 33, 292-309. (Reprinted in Spade 1988.)
Spade, Paul Vincent, 1982. "Three Theories of Obligationes: Burley, Kilvington
and Swyneshed on Counterfactual Reasoning," History and Philosophy of
Logic 3, 1-32.
Spade, Paul Vincent, 1987. "Five Early Theories in the Mediaeval Insolubilia
Literature," Vivarium 25, 24-46.
Spade, Paul Vincent, 1988. Lies, Language and Logic in the late Middle Ages>
London, Variorum Reprints.
Spade, Paul Vincent, and Stump, Eleonore, 1983. "Walter Burley and the
Obligationes Attributed to William Sherwood," History and Philosophy of
Logic 4, 9-26.
Stump, Eleonore, 1980 "William of Sherwood's Treatise On Obligations,"
Historiographia Linguistica 7: 1/2, 249-264.
Stump, Eleonore, 1981. "Roger Swyneshed's Theory Of Obligations," Medioevo 7,
135-174.
Thierry of Chartres 1971. "Commentum Super Ebdomadas Boetii," in Nikolaus
Haring (ed.), Commentaries on Boethius by Thierry of Chartres and his School,
Toronto, Pontifical Institute of Mediaeval Studies.
Yagisawa, Takashi, 1988. "Beyond Possible Worlds," Philosophical Studies 53,
171-204.
F A B I E N N E PIRONET
T H E R E L A T I O N S B E T W E E N I N S O L U B L E S A N D
O B L I G A T I O N S IN M E D I E V A L D I S P U T A T I O N S
1. INTRODUCTION
Almost as ancient as philosophy, the paradox of the Liar in all its forms
has always disturbed logicians because it questions several basic principles
of logic and hence undermines its own foundations. The paradigmatic
insoluble, 'What I say is false' is a proposition that, made in certain
circumstances, puts forward paradoxical evidence due to its self-reflexive
form and to the nature of its alethic predicate. That is why it leads to a
vicious circle:
a) i f the proposition 'What I say is false' is true,
it is true that what I say is false,
therefore what I say is false,
and what I say is the proposition 'What I say is false,'
therefore the proposition 'What I say is false' is false;
b) if the proposition 'What I say is false' is false,
it is false that what I say is false,
therefore what I say is true,
and what I say is the proposition 'What I say is false,'
therefore the proposition 'What I say is false' is true,
Does this mean that, the same proposition being at the same time true
and false or, what is no better, true and false by turns, our principles of
bivalence and non-contradiction are not guaranteed anymore? A n y
logician would say no. Let us see how medieval logicians tried to save us
from this threat.
One of the oldest medieval solutions consisted in denying any
meaning to such propositions. The cassantes (cassers) argued that I can
actually utter a proposition such as 'What I say is false,' but i f the
predicate 'false' refers to the proposition it is a part of, the proposition
has no meaning (the link with its meaning is "cassed" or broken), no
more meaning, in fact, than there would be i f I were to say 'I am deeply
asleep' or 'I am dead'1
.
95
M. Yrjonsuuri (ed.), Medieval Formal Logic 95-114.
© 2001 Kluwer Academic Publishers. Printed in the Netherlands.
96 F A B I E N N E PIRONET
Another solution, more widely adopted than the previous one,
consisted in denying the self-reference of such propositions. This means
that the predicate 'false' can refer to any proposition but the one it is a
part of. Some logicians considered that the scope of this restrictive rule
should be wide ; i.e. the rule should be applied to any self-reflexive
proposition, others that it should be weak, i.e. only applied to insoluble
propositions. But it seems that each of these positions easily invites
criticism: it is too large in the first case (why should we say that the
predicate 'in English' should refer to any proposition but the one it is a
part of, e.g. 'What I say is in English'?); it is ad hoc in the second case
(why should we create special rules for insolubles?). In spite of the
differences between these two solutions (cassation and restriction), we
see that they adopt the same strategy: the aim is somehow or other to
expel insoluble propositions from all (meaningful) discourse.
Another kind of strategy first developed, as far as we know, by
Thomas Bradwardine (ca. 1295-1349) consisted in analysing the notions
of truth and signification so as to find a solution inside language itself.
Insoluble propositions are not rejected, but, as they signify themselves to
be false and, at the same time, themselves to be true (because every
proposition signifies or implies3
itself to be true4
), it is claimed that they
are simply false (because a proposition is true if and only i f howsoever it
signifies the case to be, so it is; and it is never the case that one and the
same proposition is true and false at once). So insolubles are not expelled
from all discourse, they have only one truth-value and no paradox results
from that. Compared to the solution by weak restriction, this solution
has the advantage of not being ad hoc (because the principle applies to
every proposition and not only to insoluble ones), and, although widely
applied to every proposition, it does not lead to the same inconveniences
as the wide-restriction solution does. If you indeed accept the
principle that every proposition signifies or implies itself to be true, you
do not expel any proposition from all discourse and it does not produce
any undesired effect on not-insoluble propositions.
This is not the place to catalogue every solution to this problem
medieval logicians put forward. There are so many of these, and some of
them are so subtle that no one who is acquainted with them could ever
doubt the great theoretical interest the question had at that period; when
truth was not just a matter of logic, but also of theology. As an extreme
example of the logical difficulties which propositions intended to express
the truth could face, the discussion of insolubles was integrated into
every subject: treatises on reference (suppositio), on meaning
INSOLUBLES A N D OBLIGATIONS 97
(significatio), on inference (consequentia), on ambiguous propositions
(sophismata) and on obligation (obligatio).
With regard to reference and meaning, the connexion is clear because
those notions are closely related to the truth-conditions of propositions.
With regard to sophisms, the connexion is also clear since insolubles
are a special kind of proposition presenting a problem of interpretation.
With regard to inference, S. Read tackles the question in his article
"Self-reference and Validity Revisited" below.
2. I N S O L U B L E S A N D OBLIGATIONS
Treatises on obligations are, from a theoretical point of view, treatises
in which the rules of disputation are established and discussed. The
theories which such treatises expound are illustrated and put into practice
in obligational disputations, i.e. those "games" in which two
interlocutors are opposed; one of whom (the opponent) has to present
propositions to which the other (the respondent) has to answer in
certain ways, depending on the special kind of obligation chosen5
. The
opponent tries to lead his adversary into maintaining contradictory propositions,
while the respondent tries to escape from this. In general, propositions
proposed by the opponent are set in a casus, a case, a situation
that will be accepted by both interlocutors as true, e.g. "Let it be posited
that every man is in Rome, I propose to you ' Y o u are in Rome.'" Here,
the case has to be admitted because it is not logically impossible, and the
proposition has to be granted because it follows from the casus.
We note here that insolubles and obligations have something in
common, the recourse to a casus. Indeed, self-reference in an insoluble
proposition only takes place under very precisely-defined circumstances,
a casus, outside of which the problem vanishes: the proposition 'What I
say is false' will be insoluble if and only if it is the only thing I say; the
proposition 'Every proposition is false' will be insoluble if and only if
only false propositions exist or i f this proposition 'Every proposition is
false' is the only one that exists. The case is exactly the same for
pragmatic insolubles: the proposition ' Y o u will throw me in the water' is
not in itself insoluble; it will only be so in a context such as this: Plato is
the guard of a bridge that no one can cross without his assent. Socrates
comes asking Plato i f he will allow him to cross. The answer is: i f in the
first proposition you utter you speak the truth, I will allow you to cross
the bridge, but i f you speak falsely, I shall throw you in the water. Then
Socrates says: You will throw me in the water.
98 F A B I E N N E PIRONET
The link between insolubles and obligations was established especially
by authors who, like William Heytesbury (before 1313-1372/3), solved
the problem of insolubles in terms of obligations. It is underlined in his
definition of an insoluble sentence:
An insoluble sentence is one of which mention is made in an insoluble casus, such
that if in the same casus it signifies precisely as its words commonly pretend,
<then> from its being true it follows that it is false, and vice versa6
.
And the solution, given in the form of five rules, seems quite simple:
Rule 1: If someone constructs a casus of an insoluble, either he posits
how that insoluble should signify, or he does not. If not, then
when the insoluble is proposed, one should respond to it
exactly as one would respond when the casus is not assumed.
Rule 2: Second, notice that if a casus of an insoluble is posited, and
together with that it is assumed that the insoluble precisely
signifies just as its terms commonly pretend, the casus may
in no way be admitted.
Rule 3: Third, if someone constructs a casus of an insoluble, and
together with that it is assumed that the insoluble signifies as
its terms pretend, but not precisely, then when this casus is
admitted, the insoluble has to be conceded as following, in
whatever position it is proposed, but that it is true has to be
denied as being inconsistent.
Rule 4: If someone constructs a casus of an insoluble, and together
with that it is assumed that the insoluble signifies
conjunctively precisely as its words pretend—call that
A—and that B, or something else whatever may be, exists
<then> if the opposite of that conjunct is inconsistent with
the whole casus, the casus has to be denied as formally
including contradictories.
Rule 5: But i f someone constructs a casus of an insoluble, and
together with that it is assumed that the insoluble signifies
precisely disjunctively as its words pretend or that A is B, or
something of this sort, <then>, unless what is disjoined with
the insoluble is consistent with the whole casus, the casus is
not to be admitted.
At first sight, this way of solving insolubles seems to adopt a strict
strategy of rejection: insoluble cases are in no way admitted because they
lead to a formal contradiction. But we see too that several kinds of
INSOLUBLES A N D OBLIGATIONS 99
answer are distinguished, depending on the way the terms signify. As I
have already mentioned, a proposition becomes insoluble only when it is
inserted into a casus, a part of which consists, in Heytesbury's terms, in
positing that the proposition precisely signify just as its terms commonly
pretend. Before commenting on Heytesbury's rules, and showing how the
formal contradiction that arises depends on the precise signification of
the terms, it will be necessary to discuss some general points concerning
the theory of signification.
It was well known in medieval logic that spoken and written languages
are purely conventional and arbitrary while mental language is natural,
i.e. signifies the same things for every man. A n immediate consequence
of this is that we can play with language and modify the signification of
spoken and written terms at pleasure. The operation by which we give a
signification to a term is called 'imposition' or 'institution'. In general,
every categorematic term8
has a signification which is commonly
adopted by all the speakers of a language9
, e.g. the word 'man'
commonly signifies men, the verb 'to run' commonly signifies the
action of running, etc. This common signification is what a term 'firstly
signifies' (primarie significat). This convention is important in order to
maintain a minimum of intelligibility in discussions. In a tract on
insolubles inspired by Heytesbury's, a certain Magister lohannes
Eclif(?)1 0
considers it necessary to recall this convention:
To respond to insolubles I first suppose that every proposition in Latin in a
disputation precisely signifies according to the common institution of grammar
unless the opponent and the respondent agree upon a new imposition.
This supposition is evident because in every school and in every faculty where
disputations are held one has to presuppose the grammar that expresses the
significate of words according to the idiom in which disputation is held. Otherwise
propositions such as 'God exists' or 'something exists' or any other proposition
submitted would have to be discussed, because the way in which it signifies would
be unknown, which is inconsistent and absurd.
This is confirmed: it happens that one and the same proposition has different
meanings in different idioms; therefore either the respondent has to know every
language or he has to doubt every proposition or he just has to understand what is
proposed to him according to the common institution of the idiom in which the
disputation is held where no new imposition has been applied to the term. The first
two parts [of the disjunction] are generally false; therefore the thrid is true, that is
equivalent to the first supposition.
To change the signification of a term, we have to operate a new
imposition and this, again according to Magister lohannes Eclif(?), can
be done in any of three ways:
100 F A B I E N N E PIRONET
Anew imposition can be made in three ways.
<1> A term or a proposition12
can be imposed to signify something more than
it does according to its common institution, and what this signification will be is
not specified to the respondent, e.g. let this proposition 'a falsehood exists' signify
just as its terms commonly pretend, but not precisely.
<2> The new signification is specified to the respondent, e.g. let this proposition
'a falsehood exists' signify precisely that a falsehood exists and that God
exists, or precisely signify disjunctively that a falsehood exists or that you run.
<3> A term or a proposition receives a completely different signification, e.g.
let this proposition 'a man exists' precisely signify that an ass is running, or let
this term ' A ' (or any other term that did not first precisely signify something)
signify a man, or be convertible with the term 'man.'1 3
In case <1>, the respondent should ask the opponent what the new
signification of the terms is and then answer according to Heytesbury's
rules 2-5 discussed below. If the opponent refuses to specify what the
new signification of the terms is, the respondent should reject1 4
the case
because he cannot answer to a proposition he does not understand.1 5
In case <2>, the respondent has to answer according to Heytesbury's
rules 4 and 5 discussed below.
In case <3>, we see that a proposition can have, at least for the time
of the disputation, a completely new signification; the respondent then
has to adapt his answer to this new signification: if the opponent posits
the case that the proposition 'a man exists' precisely signifies that a
stone exists, the respondent should admit that case—because it is
possible—and deny the consequence (inference) 'a man exists, therefore,
an animal exists,' because it is invalid according to the new signification
of the term 'man'—even if it is valid according to the common
signification of terms.
In case <1>, something will be added to the common signification.
The proposition where such a change is made will then have two
significations: its first signification {primaria signification), that depends
on the common meaning of terms, and a secondary one (secundaria
significatio), that depends on the new imposition. In case <2>, the
common signification is modified but the modified signification is not
unrelated to the original one. It is only in case <3> that the common
signification will be totally replaced (sequestrata16
) by a new one, that
will become its primary signification for the time of the disputation.
These remarks now lead us to a better understanding of Heytesbury's
rules on insolubles, as well as of the link that can be made between his
solution and others.'
I will here repeat earlier quoted rules in order to analyze them.
INSOLUBLES A N D OBLIGATIONS 101
Rule 1: i f someone constructs a casus of an insoluble, either he posits
how that insoluble should signify, or he does not. If not, then
when the insoluble is proposed, one should respond to it
exactly as one would respond when the casus is not assumed.
Let us take the proposition "Socrates is saying what is false" (Socrates
dicit falsum). It is not in itself insoluble. To become insoluble, two
conditions must be fulfilled: 1" it must be the case that it is the only
proposition Socrates utters, T the terms of that proposition have to
signify precisely, i.e. exclusively, as its words commonly pretend. If
condition 1° is not fulfilled, the proposition is not insoluble, because the
predicate 'what is false' could refer to any other proposition uttered by
Socrates. It will then be easy to determine the truth-value of the
proposition "Socrates is saying what is false": it will be true i f the
proposition it refers to is false, and false if the proposition it refers to is
true. If condition V is not fulfilled, the proposition is not insoluble,
because it could signify that a man is an animal, or anything else.
Conditions V and 2" are in fact two casus that are superposed one on
the other. One should not be amazed at this, because imposition is one of
the several kinds of obligation, i.e. that kind of obligation in which the
casus is that one term or another is imposed to signify something else
than what it usually does. In general, any new imposition has to be
admitted, because spoken and written languages are completely arbitrary.
Therefore, i f someone posits the casus that Socrates says the
proposition "Socrates is saying what is false" and no other, without
making any assumption about how the terms signify (so that condition
2" is not fulfilled), the respondent must admit the casus, because, as he
does not know which is the precise signification of the proposition, it is
possible that the casus implies no contradiction. In the absence of
specification, the proposition "Socrates is saying what is false" can
signify anything and anyhow. Indeed, as at least one of its possible
significations would not imply any contradiction, e.g. i f it signifies
precisely that a man is an animal, the casus is possible and must be
admitted. Then, when the proposition "Socrates is saying what is false"
is proposed for the first time, the respondent should answer as i f the
casus was not posited, i.e. as i f it was not the only proposition Socrates
utters (i.e. as i f condition V was not fulfilled).
To explain this apparently strange rule, we should mention some
other principles of obligation games. A n obligation is a kind of contract
concluded by two adversaries, from which results a kind of link between
102 F A B I E N N E PIRONET
them for a time: they cannot do anything they like, they must compel
themselves to respect certain rules. Inside an obligational disputation, we
see that there is also a kind of link between propositions: some
propositions are relevant (pertinens) to others, because they follow from
or are inconsistent with them, some propositions are irrelevant
{impertinens) to others, because they neither follow from nor are
inconsistent with them: ' Y o u are an animal' is relevant-following to
'You are a man,' ' Y o u are not an animal' is relevant-inconsistent to
'You are a man,' ' Y o u are a musician' is irrelevant to ' Y o u are a man.'
This logical link that exists or does not exist between propositions has
some effect on the answers the respondent must give. The general rules
are: every relevant-following proposition has to be granted, every
relevant-inconsistent proposition has to be denied, every irrelevant
proposition has to be granted or denied or doubted according to its own
truth-value, i.e. according to the truth-value it has outside the casus: it
will be granted i f it is true outside the casus, denied if it is false outside
11
the casus and doubted i f it is impossible to determine its truth-value .
If we now go back to Heytesbury's first rule, we can better understand
why he says that the respondent should answer as if the casus were not
posited: it is because the proposition "Socrates is saying what is false" is
irrelevant. And this proposition is irrelevant because, as the opponent
refuses to say how its terms signify, it is not linked in any way to
anything. If it is not linked, it is as i f no casus were posited ...
Now, how should the respondent answer to this irrelevant
proposition? Is it true, is it false? He cannot know, as he does not know
how it signifies. So he has to doubt it or to ask for its signification . If
the opponent then specifies the signification, the respondent will answer
according to rules 2-5, but, in this case, we can wonder why the
opponent did not specify it at the beginning of the disputation. If the
opponent again refuses to specify the signification, the disputation will
lead to no result, and we can wonder why he should play in such a foolish
way, as his aim is to lead his adversary to a contradiction.
We should notice here that Heytesbury does not agree with Eclif(?) on
the answer to make in such a case. If the opponent refuses to specify the
signification of terms, the respondent should either
I admit the casus, because it is possible and then answer to the
proposition as if the casus had not been posited
(Heytesbury), or
INSOLUBLES A N D OBLIGATIONS 103
II reject the casus because he cannot answer to a proposition he
does not understand (Eclif(?)1 9
).
Eclif(?)'s position seems to make much more sense than Heytesbury's,
especially as Heytesbury's solution leads either to the application of
other rules, if the opponent specify the signification of terms, or, i f not,
to the impossibility of continuing the disputation, i.e. to the same result
as Eclif(?)'s solution. So why this seemingly useless detour? Perhaps
because he wanted his account to be comprehensive; in which case he felt
he should specify at some point in his treatise, how one should respond
to an irrelevant proposition? Or perhaps because he thinks that the
respondent could answer in other ways than by doubting. The respondent
would then answer according to the signification he himself gave to the
terms, and grant the proposition if he gives it a signification according
to which it is true or deny it i f he gives it a signification according to
which it is false. But in this case it is clear that the opponent will have
considerable difficulty in leading his adversary to a contradiction .
Rule 2: i f a casus of an insoluble is posited, and together with that it
is assumed that the insoluble precisely signifies just as its
terms commonly pretend, the casus may in no way be
admitted.
If we continue with the example mentioned above, we see that here the
proposition "Socrates is saying what is false" is insoluble, because
conditions 1° and 2° are fulfilled: the casus is constructed so that this
proposition is self-reflexive, and according to that casus, the only
possible common meaning of the terms is that the predicate 'what is
false' refers to the proposition it is a part of. According to condition 2"
(the terms precisely, i.e. exclusively, signify as they commonly pretend),
the only proposition the predicate 'what is false' can refer to is the
proposition it is a part of and no other. Why does Heytesbury say that a
casus like this has to be rejected? One of the basic rules of obligations is
that a casus has to be rejected i f and only if it is impossible, i.e. i f it leads
to a formal contradiction. So, while some logicians admit that it is
possible for Socrates to say "Socrates is saying what is false," and
nothing else, which precisely signifies that Socrates is saying what is
false, and consider that what Socrates says is not a proposition or that
this proposition is false or that it has no truth-value , Heytesbury
considers that the second condition of this casus is impossible and that,
as such, the casus has to be rejected. It is impossible, because it implies
104 F A B I E N N E PIRONET
that one and the same proposition is true and false at the same time,
which is logically impossible .
Rule 3: i f someone constructs a casus of an insoluble, and together
with that it is assumed that the insoluble signifies as its terms
pretend, but not precisely, then when this casus is admitted,
the insoluble has to be conceded as following, in whatever
position it is proposed, but that it is true has to be denied as
being inconsistent.
According to Heytesbury, a proposition is true if and only i f it precisely,
i.e. exclusively, signifies in accordance with what is actually the case
(praecise significat sicut est). We have seen, above, that when a term or
a proposition receives a new imposition, it then has two significations,
its first signification and its secondary signification—unless of course its
common signification would be completely replaced or suspended for the
time of obligation. Let us go back now to our insoluble casus "Socrates is
saying what is false" accompanied by the condition that Socrates says
nothing else and that the terms signify just as they commonly pretend,
but not precisely so. We note that condition 1° is fulfilled and that,
according to that casus, the only common signification, i.e. the first
signification, of the terms is that the predicate 'what is false' refers to
the proposition it is a part of. But, as condition 2° is not fulfilled, the
proposition could also signify something else according to which it could
be true, e.g. i f its secondary signification is that God exists. In that case,
the proposition "Socrates is saying what is false" would be false
according to its first signification and true according to its secondary
signification. As it could be true in a way, the casus has to be admitted,
because it is possible; the proposition "Socrates is saying what is false"
has to be granted as following from the casus, because it is true that
Socrates is saying what is false; but it must be denied that the proposition
"Socrates is saying what is false" is true, because to be true it should
signify only as is the case, i.e. signify as is the case according to both of
its significations, and this is not so.
The proposition "Socrates is saying what is false" is false according to
its first signification and thus simply false, because its first signification
is that Socrates is saying what is false, where 'what is false' refers to the
proposition "Socrates is saying what is false" that, according to the
casus admitted, signifies that Socrates is saying what is false and that God
exists. So to be true according to its first signification, it should be the
case that the proposition "Socrates is saying what is false" be false
INSOLUBLES A N D OBLIGATIONS 105
according to both of its significations; which is not the case, since it is
true according to its secondary signification at least.
Immediately after rule 3, Heytesbury notes that:
If someone ask under this casus what the sentence uttered in this way by Socrates
signified other than that Socrates is saying what is false, I say to him that the
respondent does not have to solve or to give his determination for that question.23
It is thus enough for the respondent to know that the proposition could
possibly be true to admit the casus. And if the opponent later proposes
that the proposition is true or false, the respondent does not even have
to ask what the proposition secondarily signifies before answering,
because it is clear that the proposition is false whatever its secondary
signification may be.
We have seen, above, why the proposition "Socrates is saying what is
false" is false even i f its secondary signification is true. It is clear, for
similar reasons, that the falsity of its secondary signification is sufficient
to make the proposition false.
After having conceded that the proposition is false, the respondent
will not be forced into a contradiction by the following argument:
[1] the proposition uttered by Socrates, "Socrates is saying what
is false" is false;
[2] therefore it signifies otherwise than is the case,
[3] and it signifies that Socrates is saying what is false;
[4] therefore it is not the case that Socrates is saying what is
false;
[5] therefore i f Socrates is saying what is false, Socrates is saying
what is true, which is a contradiction
because to validly conclude [4] from [2] and [3], it should be added in [3]
that the proposition that Socrates is saying what is false is precisely
what—is the only thing that—the proposition "Socrates is saying what
is false" signifies, which is contrary to the casus admitted.
In fact, [3] should become
[3'] and it signifies that Socrates is saying what is false and that
God exists
or
[3"] and it signifies that Socrates is saying what is false and that
God does not exist.
And [4] should become
106 F A B I E N N E PIRONET
[4'] therefore it is not the case that (Socrates is saying what is
false and God exists),
which is equivalent to 'Socrates is not saying what is false or God does
not exist' and thus to 'Socrates is saying what is true or God does not
exist'; or
[4"] therefore it is not the case that (Socrates is saying what is
false and God does not exist),
which is equivalent to 'Socrates is not saying what is false or God exists'
and thus to 'Socrates is saying what is true or God exists.'
To be true, [4'] should be true according to its first part, i.e. 'Socrates
is saying what is true.' But this is impossible because, according to the
casus admitted, it refers to the proposition "Socrates is saying what is
false" that signifies that Socrates is saying what is false and God exists.
As this last proposition is true only according to its secondary
signification (cf. supra), it cannot be precisely true.
With [4"] we go back to the situation outlined above: this proposition
is true, but only according to its second part, thus it is not precisely true.
The first part 'Socrates is saying what is true' cannot be true, because,
according to the casus admitted, it refers to the proposition "Socrates is
saying what is false" that signifies that Socrates is saying what is false
and God does not exist. A s this last proposition is false, as regards its
secondary signification at least, it cannot be precisely true.
As it is impossible to conclude that the proposition is precisely true,
the respondent is not forced into a contradiction.
The opponent could also modify the significate of terms or
propositions in the second way described, i.e. by adding something to the
common signification, not as a secondary signification, but as constituting
a part of the new first signification. He could for example posit
the casus that the proposition "Socrates is saying what is false" precisely
signifies that Socrates is saying what is false and that God exists, or that
Socrates is saying what is false and that no God exists. To give an
appropriate answer to such a casus, Heytesbury proposes rules 4 and 5.
Rule 4: i f someone construct a casus of an insoluble, and together
with that it is assumed that the insoluble signifies
conjunctively precisely as its word pretend—call that A—and
that B , or something else whatever may be, exists <then> i f
the opposite of that conjunct is inconsistent with the whole
INSOLUBLES A N D OBLIGATIONS 107
casus, the casus has to be denied as formally including
contradictories.
This rule is to be applied in the first casus mentioned just above, because
it is clear that it would imply a formal contradiction. Indeed, i f the
proposition "Socrates is saying what is false" precisely signifies that
Socrates is saying what is false and that God exists, the respondent should
reject the casus, otherwise he would be forced into a contradiction by the
following arguments:
[1] if the casus is admitted, the proposition is possible so
signifying, therefore it is true or false.
[2] if it is true, it must be true for each of its conjuncts;
therefore it is true for its first conjunct that precisely signifies
that Socrates is saying what is false;
therefore it is the case that Socrates is saying what is false;
therefore what Socrates says is false, and Socrates says
"Socrates says what is false";
therefore the proposition "Socrates says what is false" is false;
therefore if the proposition "Socrates says what is false" is
true, it is false.
CONTRADICTION
[3] if it is false, it must be false for at least one of its conjuncts,
and the second conjunct (God exists) is not false;
therefore the first conjunct is false that precisely signifies that
Socrates is saying what is false;
therefore it is not the case that Socrates is saying what is false,
and Socrates says "Socrates is saying what is false";
therefore the proposition "Socrates is saying what is false" is
true;
therefore if the proposition "Socrates is saying what is false"
is false, it is true.
CONTRADICTION
Note that no contradiction would arise if the opposite of the second
conjunct was necessary. If the casus was that the proposition "Socrates
says what is false" precisely signifies that Socrates says what is false and
that God does not exist, this proposition would be simply false because
the falsity of its second conjunct.
Rule 5: if someone constructs a casus of an insoluble, and together
with that it is assumed that the insoluble signifies precisely
108 F A B I E N N E PIRONET
disjunctively as its words pretend or that A is B , or something
of this sort, <then>, unless what is disjoined with the insoluble
is consistent with the whole casus, the casus is not to be
admitted.
This rule is to be applied in the second casus mentioned just above,
because it is clear that it would imply a formal contradiction. Indeed, i f
the proposition "Socrates is saying what is false" precisely signifies that
Socrates is saying what is false or that no God exist, the respondent
should reject the casus, otherwise he would be forced into a contradiction
by the following arguments:
[1] i f the casus is admitted, the proposition is possible so
signifying, therefore it is true or false.
[2] i f it is true, it must be true for at least one of its disjuncts, and
the second disjunct (no God exists) is not true;
therefore the first conjunct is true that precisely signifies that
Socrates is saying what is false;
therefore it is the case that Socrates is saying what is false, and
Socrates says "Socrates is saying what is false";
therefore the proposition "Socrates is saying what is false" is
false;
therefore if the proposition "Socrates is saying what is false"
is true, it is false.
CONTRADICTION
[3] i f it is false, it must be false for each of its disjuncts;
therefore it is false for its first disjunct that precisely signifies
that Socrates is saying what is false;
therefore it is not the case that Socrates is saying what is false;
therefore what Socrates says is true, and Socrates says
"Socrates says what is false";
therefore the proposition "Socrates says what is false" is true;
therefore if the proposition "Socrates says what is false" is
false, it is true.
CONTRADICTION
Note that no contradiction would arise if the opposite of the second
disjunct was impossible. If the casus was that the proposition "Socrates
says what is false" precisely signifies that Socrates says what is false or
that God exists, this proposition would be simply true because of the
truth of its second disjunct2 4
.
I N S O L U B L E S A N D OBLIGATIONS 109
If we now compare Heytesbury's solution to others, we note that they
are not totally unrelated. In sophisms 17 and 18 of his Sophismata
asinina, Heytesbury tackles the problem of insolubles. In both places, he
mentions three possible answers: restriction (in insoluble matters a term
cannot refer to the proposition it is a part of), cassation (an insoluble
proposition is unintelligible) and his own solution which is qualified as
"according to the common way" (secundum modum communem).
These three solutions have something in common: they adopt a strategy
of rejection, but each one of them lays emphasis on different aspects.
Restrictors insist on the fact that self-reference is forbidden (condition
1 °), while Heytesbury insists on the way terms signify (condition 2°); but
it is clear that the result is the same: if the terms of an insoluble
proposition precisely signify as they commonly pretend, the proposition
is self-reflexive. 'Cassers' insist on the unintelligibility of insoluble
propositions while Heytesbury insists on the fact that they lead to a
formal contradiction, but it is clear that a formal contradiction is
something unintelligible. Besides, it is noteworthy that he does not
particularly criticize restriction and cassation; while, as I have already
said, he strongly criticizes authors who admit that an insoluble
proposition can signify precisely as its terms commonly pretend.
3. I N S O L U B L E S A N D DISPUTATIONS
Up to this point we have mainly set out what is theorically at stake in
the many discussions on insolubles. Let us now take a look at the related
practical aspects. Heytesbury recognizes himself that his solution is not
totally satisfying. In fact it does not solve the theorical problem, but
merely provides a practical way of escaping from contradictions in
disputations. As a borderline case in logic, insolubles were introduced in
order to provide practise material for young students:
Therefore, let these things said about insolubles serve for the introduction and drill
of the young, so that when it is seen that insolubles, as their name implies, cannot
be solved without evident objection, everyone ma| quickly go beyond them to a
more useful study, pursuing it the more diligently.
In medieval universities, exercises and exams were held in the form of
disputations between students or between a student and a master. With
the development of the theory and practice of obligations, and because
of the link I mentioned above between insolubles and obligations,
obligational disputations, or texts written on the model of obligational
110 F A B I E N N E PIRONET
disputations became the place par excellence to introduce insoluble
matters, at least in what we could call the Oxford tradition of the fourteenth
century. This was so natural that, as we saw, Magister Iohannes
Eclif(?) included a chapter on imposition inside his treatise on insolubles,
even though this traditionally belongs to treatises on obligations.
As an example of disputation in which insolubles could appear, I will
mention here the sophism 25 of Heytesbury's Sophismata asinina. The
text entitled Sophismata asinina is a collection of 37 sophisms in which
the aim is to try to prove the proposition 'you are an ass.' Anything is
allowed in order to attain this goal... Here are the arguments proposed by
the opponent in sophism 25 (some comments are given after each
argument). The respondent should answer to each of them trying not to
contradict himself.
[ 1 ] Y o u are an ass.
This proposition should be denied, because it is impossible. The
opponent should now try to prove it.
[2] I prove: you are one of these, and any one of these is an ass;
therefore you are an ass, indicating by the word 'these' two
asses. The consequence is evident.
This consequence has to be granted, because it is valid, but the
antecedent has to be denied, because its first part 'you are one of these'
is false i f the word 'these' indicates two asses. The opponent now has to
prove the antecedent.
[3] I prove the antecedent, and I posit the case that whenever
you answer to this proposition 'you are one of these'
otherwise than affirmatively, you know that you are one of
these, and that whenever you answer affirmatively, you know
that you are not one of these. If this is admitted, I propose
this proposition 'you are one of these.'
The case posited here should be rejected, because, as will be shown in
arguments [4] and [5], i f the respondent admits it, he will be inevitably
led to a contradiction.
[4] If this is rejected, I argue so: whenever you answer to that
proposition otherwise than affirmatively, you know that you
are one of these, but you answer to that proposition
otherwise than affirmatively; therefore you know that you
INSOLUBLES A N D OBLIGATIONS 111
are one of these, still indicating by the word 'these' two asses,
as has been said before.
[5] If this proposition 'you are one of these' is granted, I argue
so: whenever you answer affirmatively, you know that you
are not one of these, but you answer affirmatively; therefore
you know that you are not one of these; therefore you should
not have granted that you are one of these.
So, i f you admit the casus, you are an ass...
University of Montreal
NOTES
1
C. J. Martin analyses this solution in his "Obligations and Liars," see pp. 80-85.
2
These notions of wide or strong restriction and weak restriction are discussed by
Spade 1987, 38-42. See also Roure 1970, 219-225.
3
Cf. John Buridan, Sophismata, ch. 8, soph. 7, translated in Hughes 1982, 48-49.
4
Just as every affirmative proposition implies the existence of the significates to
which its terms refer, every proposition we assert implies itself to be true,
otherwise we would not assert it. This claim rests on a psychological analysis of
what a lie is: when we assert something (affirmatively or negatively) we are
supposed to assent to it; lying is asserting (i.e. presenting as true) something we
know or believe to be false, something we do not give our assent to. As every
proposition signifies or implies itself to be true, this solution is not ad hoc.
On the several kinds of obligations, cf. Stump, 1982, 315-334, and Spade
1982c, 335-341.
6
Cf. Spade 1979, 46, §45.
7
Cf. Spade 1979, 47-51, § 48-53.
8
Syncategorematic terms, like 'if,' 'and,' 'then,' 'every,' etc. do not signify by
themselves, they 'consignify,' they modify the signification of the terms they are
joined to. Cf. Spade 1982a, 190-191.
There is another exception to that general rule: terms like 'A,' 'B,' 'buba,' etc. are
considered by some people to have a signification in themselves; while others
consider that they should be assimilated to demonstrative pronouns that have no
signification as long as we do not know what they exactly refer to. Cf. Pironet
1994, 148-153.
1 0
This text is found in ms. Oxford, Bodleian Library, Lat. misc. e. 79,
ff. 43ra-45vb ('0' in the critical apparatus). I am preparing an edition of it. It is
difficult to determine who is its author. De Rijk suggests that it could be John
Wyclif, whose name is quite near to the name we read in the explicit, i.e. "Eclif' or
"Ecaf, cf. de Rijk 1977, 153. However, in 1986, P.V. Spade published Wyclifs
Summa insolubilium, and it seems clear to me that Eclif(?)'s and Wyclif s positions
on insolubles are not the same.
112 F A B I E N N E PIRONET
" Note that the mention "impositione [corr.: propositione O]" means that I
corrected the word 'propositione' in the manuscript O to 'impositione.' "Unde per
responsionem ad insolubilia primo suppono quod quaelibet propositio in latina
lingua disputationis praecise significet secundum communem institutionem
grammaticae nisi [corr.: ubi O] in aliqua nova impositione [corr.: propositione O]
conveniant opponens et respondens. Haec suppositio patet eo quod in omni secta et
in omni alia facultate disputabili praesupponitur [corr.: praesupponi O] grammatica
exprimens significatum vocum [corr.: vocalem O] illius idiomatis in quo fit
disputatio. Aliter enim talis propositio 'deus est' vel 'aliquid est' vel quaecumque
alia vera proposita semper foret disputanda: quia nesciretur quo modo significat,
quod est inconveniens et absurdum. Conflrmatur sic: aliquando eadem propositio
diversimode significat in diversis idiomatibus; ergo vel oportet respondentem
quemlibet scire omnes linguas vel dubitare quamlibet propositionem sibi
propositam [corr.: proposita O] vel solum intelligere propositum juxta communem
institutionem idiomatis in quo disputat ubi non fit sibi nova impositio termini.
Sed duae primae partes communiter sunt falsae, ut patet; ideo tertia pars est vera,
quae convertitur cum prima suppositione." f. 43rb.
A new imposition can be applied to a single term or to a whole proposition, but
it is clear that when it is applied to a term only, the signification of the whole
proposition it is a part of will be also affected.
Note that "<est>" means that I added the word 'est' to the text while "[et]"
means that I removed the word 'et' from the text. "Nova impositio solet fieri tribus
modis. Aut enim terminus sive propositio imponitur ad significandum aliquam
ultra communem institutionem et non certificatur respondens qualis ista significatio
erit, sicut hie [corr.: hoc O]: significet ista 'falsum <est>' sicut communiter verba
praetendunt, non tamen praecise. Aut de tali significatione certificatur [et O]
respondens sicut hie [corr.: hoc O]: significet ista 'falsum est' praecise quod falsum
est et quod deus est, vel significet disjunctive praecise quod falsum est vel quod tu
curris. Aut mutatur terminus sive propositio totaliter in aliam significationem,
sicut hie [corr.: hoc O]: significet quaelibet talis 'homo est' praecise quod asinus
currit, vel significet talis terminus A'—sive aliquis alius qui non prius significavit
aliquid praecise—hominem, sive convertatur cum tali termino 'homo,'" f.44va-b.
1 4
It should be noted here that in treatises on obligations, the verb 'admittere' is
used for admitting a case (because it is possible), and the verb 'concedere' for
granting a proposition (because it is true), but the verb 'negare' is used for denying
a case (because it is impossible or unintelligible) as well as for denying a
proposition (because it is false). To preserve this distinction between cases and
propositions, I will translate 'nego casum' by 'I reject the case' and 'nego
propositionem' by 'I deny the proposition.'
5
We shall see below that Iohannes Eclif(?) and Heytesbury do not agree on this
point; the first says that the respondent should not answer, while Heytesbury says
that the casus has to be admitted. Cf. infra pp. 103-105 where I discuss
Heytesbury's rule 1.
1 6
The notion of impounded signification is discussed in a tract on obligations
which is to be found in the Logica printed in Oxford in 1483: "Nota etiam quod
primarium significatum propositionis non sequestratur per novam impositionem
nisi addita dictione exclusiva, unde si ponatur ista 'deus est' ad significandum
INSOLUBLES A N D OBLIGATIONS 113
hominem esse asinum, non adhuc sequestrator primarium significatum: quia stat
satis bene quod ista 'deus est' significet utrumque significatum, unum ex prima, et
alteram ex secunda impositione, sed oportet addere 'solum' vel 'solum modo,' ut
impono quod 'deus est' solum significat hominem esse asinum, et tunc
sequestrator prima significatio," cf. Pironet 1994, 595-596. Note that the term
'praecise,' which is the exclusive term that Heytesbury usually uses, plays exactly
the same role as the term 'solum' in this text.
1 7
These rules are very common. See for example the treatise De obligationibus in
Pironet 1994, 582-584.
1 8
These are the answers suggested in similar cases. Cf. Sophisms 26 and 27 in the
Sophismata asinina where Heytesbury is ironic about this kind of attitude: "Pro
isto respondeo, et dico quod non intelligo consequentiam (...) Aliter posset
responderi ad primum, quando dicitur quod 'lateat te quid demonstrator,' dicendo
quod lateat te responsio mea, et haec responsio satis convenit demonstration!." Cf.
Pironet 1994, 424.
1 9
Cf. supra, p. 102.
2 0
These are just suggestions. This point remains quite unclear to me.
2 1
Heytesbury criticizes these opinions at large in § 4-43.
2 2
It is quite common to distinguish natural or physical impossibility from logical
impossibility. The first can be admitted, because the absolute power of God could
see to it that things are contrary to the usual natural rules. The second may in no
way be admitted, because even God cannot see to it that two contradictories should
be true at the same time. This is discussed in, among others, a treatise called
Tractatus Emmeranus de impossibili positione (De Rijk 1974, 117-123; for
English translation, cf. below pp. 000-000).
2 3
Cf. Spade 1979, 49, § 51.
2 4
Rules of this kind are discussed in the Tractatus Emmeranus de falsi positione,
(De Rijk 1974, 117-123; for English translation, cf. below pp. 000-000).
2 5
Cf. P.V. Spade, Guillelmus of Heytesbury On Insolubles Sentences, p. 58, § 64.
REFERENCES
Ashworth, E. J., 1994. "Obligationes Treatises: A Catalogue of Manuscripts,
Editions and Studies," in Bulletin de Philosophic Medievale 36, 118-147.
De Rijk, Lambertus Marie, 1974. "Some Thirteenth Century Tracts on the Game of
Obligation I," Vivarium 12, 94-123.
De Rijk, Lambertus Marie, 1975. "Some Thirteenth Century Tracts on the Game of
Obligation II," Vivarium 13, 22-54.
De Rijk, Lambertus Marie, 1977. li
Logica Oxoniensis. An Attempt to Reconstruct
a Fifteenth Century Oxford Manual of Logic," Medioevo 3, 121-164.
Hughes, George, 1982. John Buridan on Self-Reference: Chapter Eight of
Buridan's Sophismata, (An Edition and a Translation with an Introduction and a
Philosophical Commentary), Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Knuuttila, Simo, 1993b. "Trinitarian Sophisms in Robert Holkot's Theology," in
S. Read (ed.), Sophisms in Medieval Logic and Grammar, (Nijhoff International
Philosophy Series 48), Dordrecht, Kluwer, 348-356.
114 F A B I E N N E PIRONET
Martin, Christopher J., 1993 "Obligations and Liars," in S. Read (ed.), Sophisms
in Medieval Logic and Grammar, (Nijhoff International Philosophy Series 48),
Dordrecht, Kluwer, 357-381. Revised version in the present collection, pp.
65-96.
Pironet, Fabienne, 1994. Guillaume Heylesbury, Sophismata asinina. Une
introduction aux disputes medievales. Presentation, edition critique et analyse,
(Collection Sic et Non), Paris, Vrin.
Pironet, Fabienne, (forthcoming). Iohanni Buridani Summularum Tractatus nonus:
De practica sophismatum (Sophismata), Critical Edition and Introduction,
Nimegue, Ingenium Publishers.
Read, Stephen, 1979. "Self-Reference and Validity," Synthese 42, 265-274.
Roure, M. L., 1970. "La problematique des propositions insolubles au XHIe
siecle
et au debut du XTVe
, suivie de Pedition des traites de W. Shyreswood, W.
Burley et Th. Bradwardine," Archives d'Histoire Doclrinale et Litteraire du
Moyen Age 37, 205-326.
Scott, T. K., Johannes Buridanus. 'Sophismata,' Critical Edition with an
Introduction, (Grammatica Speculativa 1), Stuttgart-Bad Cannstatt, Frommann
-Holzboog.
Spade, Paul Vincent, 1975. The Medieval Liar, Toronto, Pontifical Institute of
Mediaeval Studies.
Spade, Paul Vincent, 1979. William Heytesbury. 'On Insoluble Sentences': Chapter
one of his 'Rules for Solving Sophisms,' Translated with an Introduction and
Study, Toronto, Pontifical Institute of Mediaeval Studies.
Spade, Paul Vincent, "Insolubilia and Bradwardine's Theory of Signification,"
Medioevo 7, 115-134.
Spade, Paul Vincent, 1982a. "The Semantics of Terms," in N . Kretzmann, A.
Kenny, J. Pinborg and E. Stump (eds.), The Cambridge History of Later
Medieval Philosophyfrom the Rediscovery of Aristotle to the Disintegration of
Scholasticism, 1100-1600, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 188-196.
Spade, Paul Vincent, 1982b. "Insolubilia" in N. Kretzmann, A. Kenny, J. Pinborg
and E. Stump (eds.), The Cambridge History of Later Medieval Philosophy
from the Rediscovery of Aristotle to the Disintegration of Scholasticism,
1100-1600, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 246-253.
Spade, Paul Vincent, 1982c. "Obligations: Developments in the Fourteenth
Century," in N . Kretzmann, A. Kenny, J. Pinborg and E. Stump (eds.), The
Cambridge History of Later Medieval Philosophy from the Rediscovery of
Aristotle to the Disintegration of Scholasticism, 1100—1600, Cambridge,
Cambridge University Press, 335-341,
Spade, Paul Vincent, 1987. "Five Early Theories in the Medieval InsolubiliaLiterature,"
Vivarium 25, 24-46.
Spade, P. V., and Wilson, G.A., 1986. Johannis Wyclif 'Summa insolubilium,'
(Medieval and Renaissance Texts and Studies 41), Binghamton, New York.
Stump, Eleonore, 1982. "Obligations: From the Beginning to the early Fourteenth
Century," in N . Kretzmann, A. Kenny, J. Pinborg and E. Stump (eds.), The
Cambridge History of Later Medieval Philosophy from the Rediscovery of
Aristotle to the Disintegration of Scholasticism, 1100-1600, Cambridge,
Cambridge University Press, 315-334.
P A R T II
C O N S E Q U E N C E S
P E T E R K I N G
C O N S E Q U E N C E A S I N F E R E N C E :
M E D I A E V A L P R O O F T H E O R Y 1 3 0 0 - 1 3 5 0
The first half of the fourteenth century saw a remarkable flowering in
accounts of consequences (consequentiae). Logicians began to write
independent treatises on consequences, the most well-known being those
by Walter Burley (De consequentiis) and Jean Buridan (Tractatus de
consequentiis). Consequences also came to be treated systematically in
comprehensive works on logic, such as those of Walter Burley (both
versions of the De puritate artis logicae), William of Ockham (Summa
logicae), and, to a lesser extent, Jean Buridan (Summulae de
dialecticd)—as well as in works written in their wake.1
The
philosophical achievement realized in these various writings was no less
than a formulation of a theory of inference: the rules for consequences
given by these mediaeval authors spell out a natural deduction system in
the sense of Jaskowski and Gentzen.2
Recognition that mediaeval logicians are dealing with inference in the
theory of consequences, rather than with implication, is sporadic at best
* 3 *
and nonexistent at worst. This may be due to the emphasis many
modern logicians put on presenting logical systems axiomatically, since
axiomatic formulations typically have only a single rule of inference
(detachment) and focus on logical truth instead of logical consequence.4
But whatever the cause, the point that consequences are inferences has
not been appreciated, which in turn has made it hard to see how
consequences fit into the mediaeval conception of argument.
The discussion will proceed as follows: § 1 argues that consequences are
not the same as conditionals; §2 considers two objections to this
distinction; §3 argues that consequences are inferences and were
understood by mediaeval logicians to be so; §4 examines accounts of
formal validity; §5 looks at the place of consequences—the theory of
inference—in their general account of argumentation. I'll draw some
morals about the mediaeval logical enterprise by way of conclusion.
117
M. Yrjonsuuri (ed.), Medieval Formal Logic 117-145.
© 2001 Kluwer Academic Publishers. Printed in the Netherlands.
118 PETER K I N G
1. IMPLICATION A N D C O N S E Q U E N C E
A categorical sentence (say) is used to make a statement, that is, "to say
something of something" in Aristotle's phrase.5
Conditional sentences
also make statements, that is, they declare that a certain relation obtains
(namely that the consequent is conditional upon the antecedent). The
statement that a conditional sentence makes is not the same as the
statement made by any of its parts taken in isolation, of course;
conditionals neither say what their antecedents or their consequents say,
nor are they about the subjects of their antecedents or consequents. For
all that, conditional sentences do succeed in making statements.
Inferences, however, do not "say something of something." They do not
make statements. A n inference is a performance: it is something we do,
perhaps with linguistic items, but in itself it is no more linguistic than
juggling is one of the balls the juggler juggles. Furthermore, even the
statement of an inference (its linguistic representation) is not a
statement-making expression. It has parts that in isolation could be used
to make statements—namely any of the premisses or the
conclusion—but itself does not make a statement. (One sign of this is
that neither an inference nor the statement of an inference is assessed as
true or false.) In a slogan: conditionals make statements whereas
inferences do things with statements.6
Modern logicians regiment this distinction between conditionals and
inferences by presenting them as categorically different parts of the
logical landscape: the former through a primitive or defined sentential
connective appearing in well-formed formulae, for which truth is
appropriate, and the latter through rules for transforming well-formed
formulae, for which validity is appropriate. Thus conditionals and
inferences differ in kind, one belonging to the object-language and the
other to the metalanguage. They are not unrelated, however; a
Deduction Theorem can be established for many axiomatic systems, so
that i f A —* B then A Y B,7
and natural deduction systems typically use
conservative introduction and elimination rules to define the conditional
connective.
Mediaeval logicians, like their modern counterparts, treat implication
and inference as logically distinct notions, along the lines sketched
above. To begin at the beginning: a conditional sentence is a particular
kind of statement-making utterance, but different in kind from the
• • • 8 * •
paradigm case of the (simple) categorical sentence. It is instead lumped
together with conjunctive and disjunctive expressions under the generic
M E D I A E V A L PROOF T H E O R Y 1300-1350 119
heading of "compound sentence" (propositio hypothetica), on the
grounds that these three kinds of utterance all have parts that would
qualify as sentences taken by themselves, although they are not simply
reducible to their parts—a mediaeval version of our notion of the
connective of widest scope.9
So much is commonplace, derived from
Boethius and ultimately from Aristotle (De interpretatione 5 17a9-10
and 20-22). Another mediaeval commonplace is that logic is divided
into three parts, namely into words, statements, and arguments, ordered
by composition: statements are made out of words, and arguments out of
statements. These parts are not reducible to one another, for we use
words to make statements and we use statements to make arguments.1 0
Each part of logic thus constitutes its own level of analysis and carves
out a distinct part of the logical landscape. Conditional sentences, as
statement-making utterances, must therefore differ in kind from
arguments, since they belong to different parts of the landscape. Hence
consequences will be distinct from conditionals—at least, to the extent
that mediaeval logicians classify consequences with arguments.
The strength of this line of reasoning lies precisely in its premisses
being commonplace. It does not depend on any particular feature of the
doctrine of consequences. We can reason our way to the categorical
distinction between implication and inference from entrenched
mediaeval views about logic and language. The only question that
remains is whether consequences and arguments do belong together.
In comprehensive works on logic, where systematic concerns readily
come to the fore, consequences are classified with arguments and not
with sentences. William of Ockham provides a clear example. The
Summa logicae is organized into three parts based on the division o f
logic recounted above. Conditional sentences are treated in Summa
logicae 2.31 (devoted to sentences) as a species of compound sentence,
whereas consequences are the subject of the third treatise of Summa
logicae 3 (devoted to arguments).1 1
Ockham even refers to the later
discussion of consequences in his brief chapter on conditionals, so he is
aware of the distinction at precisely the point at which it matters.1 2
The
fragmentary nature of Walter Burley's De puritate artis logicae in both
versions makes it less useful as evidence, but he does describe
consequences as rules (60.12-14) and not as sentences. Jean Buridan
doesn't have a separate discussion of consequences in his Summulae de
dialectica, but at the beginning of his Tractatus de consequentiis 3 he
classifies all arguments as species of consequence.
120 PETER K I N G
These architectonic considerations give us some presumptive evidence
that consequences are logically grouped with arguments rather than
sentences. They cannot do more than that, since such considerations do
not rule out the possibility that conditionals are a species o f
consequence—that the term consequentia was used to describe arguments
and to describe conditionals. But there is both negative and positive
textual evidence against this objection, in support of the claim that
mediaeval logicians not only recognized a difference between implication
and inference but found them not to overlap at all.
The negative evidence is as follows. In all the available literature o f
this period, which runs to hundreds of pages, I have found no instance o f
any author treating 'conditional' and 'consequence' as synonymous.
Nowhere does the expression consequentia seu condicionalis or the like
occur.1 4
O f course, the architectonic considerations given above suggest
that these terms would not be everywhere interchangeable. But they
might well be interchangeable in certain contexts. For example, when
speaking of conditionals proper, some feature that they have in
common with consequences generally might be under investigation. It is
striking, though not conclusive, that such expressions are never
employed even in such contexts.
The positive evidence comes in two varieties. First, the authors under
consideration not only resist treating the terminology as interchangeable,
they also use it to mark a logical distinction: conditionals do
not merely appear along with consequences; they are actively contrasted
with consequences. Second, conditionals have different properties, since
they are true or false whereas consequences are not.1 5
We'll take each in
turn.
The evidence for the first claim is as follows. Walter Burley mentions
conditionals and consequences together in his De consequentiis §8, where
he is talking about the legitimacy of inferring a conditional composed o f
the consequent of the last of a string of conditionals from the
antecedent of the first of the string, that is: A —> B, B —> C h A —> C.
This classic example of cut-elimination, which Burley calls "the start-tofinish
inference" (consequentia a primo ad ultimum), also appears in
both versions of his De puritate artis logicae (70.1-23 and
200.20-201.3). In each instance Burley explicitly contrasts the
conditional sentences that enter into such reasoning with the
consequence made out of them. Furthermore, Burley devotes De
consequentiis §§66-72 to consequences that hold among conditionals,
clearly assigning different properties to each. For example, he gives
M E D I A E V A L PROOF T H E O R Y 1300-1350 121
truth-conditions for conditional sentences (§68), contrasting them with
consequences, which hold in virtue of topics (§§71-72).1 6
The parallel
section in the longer version of the De puritate artis logicae
(66.9-79.10) reiterates these claims.
Other logicians also contrast conditionals with consequences. William
of Ockham, as noted above, refers us in his chapter on conditional
sentences (Summa logicae 2.31) to his later discussion of consequences.
The commentary De consequentiis on Ockham, possibly written by
Bradwardine, declares in §7 that we can move from a consequence A V B
to a conditional^ —> B; Rule 15 of the Liber consequentiarum says that
we can move in either direction (a claim to be explored more fully in §5
below). Richard Lavenham in his late work Consequentiae §§41-47 gives
seven rules describing consequences that hold among conditionals. The
claims put forward by these philosophers would not make sense unless
consequences were something other than conditionals.
The evidence for the second claim is as follows. Burley and Ockham,
for example, explicitly call conditional sentences true or false: see the
De consequentiis §68 and Summa logicae 2.31 respectively. Likewise
for the Logica ad rudium 2.76, the Tractatus minor logicae 2.2, and the
Elementarium logicae 2.16. Even Buridan calls conditionals true in his
Summulae de dialectica 1.7.3.1 7
O f course, the fact that conditionals
may be true or false follows from the fact that conditional sentences are
statement-making utterances, since what it is to be a statement is, at
least in part, to have a truth-value (De interpretatione 4
17a3-4)—putting aside for now worries about future contingents and
other puzzling cases.
Consequences, on the other hand, are neither true nor false. Here the
negative evidence has quite a bit of weight. In the hundreds of pages o f
the available literature there are countless opportunities to say o f
consequences that they are true or false, opportunities that are all the
more pressing since the writers are usually grappling with the question
which consequences are to be approved and which not. Yet in all these
pages I know only three passages in which consequences are called true
or false.1 8
One occurs in Pseudo-Scotus and is a mere slip.1 9
But the
other two are found in the writings of Jean Buridan, a logician of the first
rank. N o w Buridan's view of consequences might simply be idiosyncratic;
we could set his testimony aside, given that there is no similar evidence
in any other author of the period. But we do not have to do so. The
context of each passage shows that we are not to take seriously
Buridan's mention of truth-values in connection with consequences.
122 PETER K I N G
The first passage is found in Buridan's Tractatus de consequentiis
1.3.4-6 (21.16-25), where he points out that some people (aliqui) say
that any hypothetical sentence formulated with ' i f or 'therefore' is a
consequence and that there are thus two kinds, namely true and false
consequences; he replies:
In this treatise—whether or not it be true—words signify by convention; I mean to
understand by 'consequence' a true consequence, and by 'antecedent' and
'consequent' sentences one of which follows from the other by a true or legitimate
consequence (uera seu bona consequentia).
Buridan concedes the terminology to the unnamed thinkers whose view
is under discussion. He stipulates what he will call a consequence after
reminding us of the conventionality of language, characterizing
consequences not only as true but as "true or legitimate"—and then
never calling them 'true' again in the rest of his treatise (a treatise
2 0
devoted to consequences, mind you!). This passage therefore cannot
serve as evidence that consequences, like conditionals, have truth-value.
The second passage is found in Buridan's Summulae de dialectica
1.7.6:2 1
It seems to me that a hypothetical sentence joining together two categorical
sentences by 'therefore' should likewise be counted as false if the consequence is
not necessary (which is denoted by the word 'therefore'!), and also that it is false
simply speaking if it were to have some false premiss.
Buridan proposes that we count an argument as false (reputari) i f it fails
to establish its conclusion by being either invalid or unsound. Yet there is
no suggestion here that a consequence is literally true or false the way a
statement must be. On the contrary, Buridan's plain meaning is that
consequences can be invalid or unsound, and that these are defects in
consequences just as falsity is a defect in a statement.
To sum up: in neither passage does Buridan seriously propose that
conseqences have truth-value; even if he were to do so, we can oppose to
this the negative testimony of the rest of his writings, wherein
consequences are not called true or false. And, as remarked above, even
if Buridan were to allow consequences to have truth-value, no other
logician in this period does. Instead, they say that consequences are
"legitimate (bona)" and that they "hold (tenet)" or "are valid
22
(ualet)"—properties explored further in §4.
So much for the positive evidence that mediaeval logicians recognized
the distinction between consequences and conditionals. The story is not
complete, of course; to say that consequences aren't conditionals does
M E D I A E V A L PROOF T H E O R Y 1300-1350 123
not establish what they in fact are. Before presenting the positive case
that consequences are inferences, though, we need to look at two
objections to the thesis that conditionals and consequences are logically
distinct notions.
2. T W O OBJECTIONS
The first objection runs as follows. Conditional sentences are made up o f
parts, namely the antecedent and the consequent. Similarly, arguments
are made up of parts, statements that we call the premiss(es) and the
conclusion. But the parts of consequences are uniformly called the
'antecedent' and the 'consequent' throughout the available literature.
Hence consequences must be a form of conditional sentence rather than
of argument.
The factual claims in this objection are correct, but the conclusion
that consequences must be a form of conditional sentence does not
follow. The mistake here is easy to make. The Latin terminology is
antecedens and consequens, the ancestors and cognates of the English
words 'antecedent' and 'consequent.' Modern logicians regiment their
use so that they properly apply only to conditional sentences.2 3
Well,
they do apply to conditionals in Latin, but they are not tied to them the
way the Greek grammatical terms f| TrpoTaais and f\ aTroSoais are—that
is, unlike the Greek terms, the Latin terms are not simply defined
relative to one another by their occurrence in conditional sentences.
Instead, antecedens and consequens carry the broader senses of 'what
comes before' and 'what comes after.'2 4
Hence they are equally
applicable to the parts of conditional sentences and to consequences.
The De consequentiis possibly written by Bradwardine says so explicitly
(§2):2 5
Note that a consequence is an argumentation made up of an antecedent and a
consequent.
Consequences are arguments, and, as arguments, they have two logically
distinct parts: one that comes before (the antecedent) and one that
comes after (the consequent). The terminology is more general than
that of premisses and conclusion, but no less legitimate. The pull of the
cognate word and its restricted English sense is hard to resist. But resist it
we should. The terminology used to talk about consequences doesn't give
us any reason to interpret them as conditionals, although it tempts us to.
124 PETER K I N G
The second objection is this. Buridan explicitly says that consequences
are compound sentences—Tractatus de consequentiis 1.3.2 (21.9—10):26
There are two types of sentence, namely categorical and compound, and a
consequence is a compound sentence made up of many sentences joined together by
' i f or 'therefore' or their equivalent.
Yet we have seen above that there are only three kinds of compound
sentence, namely disjunctive, conjunctive, and conditional sentences.
Consequences are surely neither of the first two, and hence must be
identified as a kind of conditional sentence. Thus consequences belong to
the same part of the logical landscape as conditionals, and so we can
reject the presumptive evidence explored in § 1 in favor of distinguishing
them.
There are two replies available to this second objection. First, while
it is true that Buridan calls consequences compound sentences, he also
calls the syllogism—the paradigm case of an argument—a compound
sentence, and in fact reducible to a conditional sentence. If syllogisms
are reducible to conditional compound sentences, consequences can still
be identified with arguments, although we may have to redraw the line
between (compound) sentences and arguments in some fashion. Given
that Buridan classifies all arguments as species of consequence, as noted
in §1, it would follow that the distinction between arguments and nonarguments
would have to be made among kinds of conditional sentences.
The drawback to this first reply is that it would require us to admit
that consequences (and arguments generally) are in fact conditionals,
which was the problem the reply was supposed to avoid. However, it does
suggest that the way to approach the second problem is by considering
what might have led Buridan to think that consequences were sentences
in the first place. Recall from the start of §1 the slogan that conditionals
make statements whereas inferences do things with statements. True
enough, but we can also describe the inferences that we make, and we do
so with sentences describing how we manipulate statements. Here is one:
" A l l swans are white objects; therefore, some white objects are swans."
What kind of sentence is this?
Modern logicians would say that this sentence does not belong to the
object-language, despite its similarity in surface grammar to, say, the
conditional sentence "If all swans are white objects, then some white
objects are swans." The inference has the logical form AY B (rather than
A —> B); the turnstile V acts as a kind of metalinguistic connective.
Hence 'A Y By
and 'A —> £ ' are not on a par.
M E D I A E V A L P R O O F T H E O R Y 1300-1350 125
Mediaeval logicians do not have our distinction between objectlanguage
and metalanguage. A sentence representing an inference is on
all fours with a conditional sentence, or any other sentence for that
matter. Yet Buridan captures the spirit of the modern reply. He admits
that the statement of an inference is a compound sentence. But this
admissison is compatible with the claim that the statement of an
inference (its linguistic representation) is not a statement-making
expression, whereas a conditional sentence is a statement-making
expression.2 9
Significantly, Buridan only says that consequences are
reducible to conditional sentences, not that they are conditional
sentences; Buridan, unlike Ockham and his followers, does not think we
can pass from one to the other in any direct fashion (as we shall see in
§5). Hence Buridan can reject the trichotomy of choices among
compound sentences, on the reasonable grounds that it taxonomizes the
kinds of statements that different sentences can make, whereas the
sentence describing a consequence does not make a statement at all, but
instead describes something done with statements.
3. C O N S E Q U E N C E A N D I N F E R E N C E
In the course of disentangling consequences from conditionals we
have run across evidence that consequences are arguments, or at least
closely related to arguments. From the position they occupy in
comprehensive logical treatises to Buridan's classification of argument as
a species of consequence to the bald statement in De consequentiis §2
cited above, mediaeval logicians take pains to underline the inferential
force of consequences. Ralph Strode, perhaps in the 1360s, explicitly
says that "a consequence is a deduction (illatio) of the consequent from
3 0
the antecedent" (1.1.02). Buridan contrasts conditionals, which are not
arguments at all, with consequences in the proper sense, which are indeed
arguments (Summulae de dialectica 7.4.5). There is also a wealth of
secondary evidence that consequences are inferences in the terminology
and the proof-procedures employed by logicians and philosophers alike
during this period. Let's have a look.
* 31
Consequences underwrite arguments. They argue for (arguitur) or
permit us to draw (concluditur) a conclusion from the premiss or
premisses, and to say in general what follows (sequitur) from what. They
can be established (probatur) by supporting grounds. Furthermore, they
are said either to be valid (ualet) or hold (tenet), or, if not, to be
fallacious (fallit). If a consequence is appropriately truth-preserving—a
126 PETER K I N G
feature to be investigated in §4—then it is said to be legitimate (bona).2
Burley is especially clear about these features of consequences in his De
consequentiis: in §11 he says that when a consequence is legitimate a
given conclusion ought to be inferred (debet inferri) through it; in §12 he
says that a test to see whether a consequence is valid determines whether
it is legitimate; in §13 he refers to legitimacy (bonitas) as a property
suited to consequences, as truth is to sentences, whose presence depends
on the inference drawn (quod inferatur) in a given case.
Mediaeval philosophers, not just mediaeval logicians, recognized in
practice that the consequence provides the inferential force of an
argument. Typically, after stating an argument, a proof will be offered of
each of the premisses, followed by a proof of the consequence (probatio
consequentiae) to ensure that the conclusion does in fact follow from
the premisses. Often the consequence is established by showing that it
conforms to an accepted rule, or that its violation would conflict with
such a rule. Given true premisses and a valid inference, of course, the
result is a sound argument; nothing but the consequence can play the role
of the latter.
The rules for consequences found in the treatises of this period spell
out the admissible sequents of a natural deduction system. Consider, for
example, the first rule for consequences offered by Ockham in his
Summa logicae 3-3.2 (591.9-11):
There is a legitimate consequence from the superior distributed term to the inferior
distributed term. For example, "Every animal is running; hence every man is
running."
Such rules are typically given in metalogical or schematic terms (often in
both ways), and they clearly refer to inferences that hold in virtue of the
logical form of their constituents. One of the earliest independent works
on consequences assimilates the legitimacy of a consequence to its
formal validity:3 3
This rule may be employed for seeing which consequences are legitimate and which
not. We should see whether the opposite of the consequent can obtain with the
antecedent. If not, the consequence is legitimate. If the opposite of the consequent
can obtain with the antecedent, the consequent is not formally valid (non ualet de
forma).
Hence the rules for consequences determine what inferential moves can
be made; at least some rules require that the inferences hold in virtue o f
the logical form of the statements involved.
M E D I A E V A L PROOF T H E O R Y 1300-1350 127
Ordinary principles of natural deduction are readily found in the
mediaeval literature, as one might expect from the 'naturalness' o f
natural deduction. Walter Burley gives a concise formulation o f
detachment in the longer version of his De puritate artis logicae that
can be virtually transcribed from the Latin: A —> B, A V B (66.13: Si A
est, B est; sed A est; ergo B est).34
Most of the treatises in this period
give cut-elimination among their very first rules: A ^ B, B —> C \- A C
(cited for Burley in §1 above). Examples could easily be multiplied.
Some mediaeval rules for consequences have no modern parallel, since
they depend on the details of mediaeval term-logic and syntactic
analysis; Ockham's first rule, cited above, is a handy instance.3 5
Likewise, some modern rules of natural deduction have no mediaeval
parallel, such as those depending on mathematical features of the
formulae (recursiveness, arbitrary depth, normal form). Then again, at
certain points mediaeval logic and modern logic arguably diverge, as
perhaps they do over existential import. For the most part, however,
there is a remarkable degree of consensus between mediaeval rules for
consequences and modern natural deduction principles of first-order
logic.
There is even some agreement between mediaeval and modern logic
on higher-order deductive principles, namely on the proof-procedure for
establishing the validity of syllogisms other than the first four moods of
the first figure: Barbara, Celarent, Darii, Ferio. Following Aristotle's
lead, mediaeval logicians adopted a general reductio-mtthod to validate
at least some syllogisms (traditionally only Baroco and Bocardo);
Buridan offers a clear statement of it in the third theorem of his
Tractatus de consequentiis 3.4 (87.99-103). In modern systems
Buridan's theorem can be restated as a metalogical rule for classical
reductio. Naturally, there is no mediaeval parallel to other techniques o f
modern proof theory, many of which are artifacts of the mathematical
nature of modern logic (such as induction on proof-length). But when
idiosyncratic features of mediaeval logic or of modern logic do not
intrude, the deduction-rules provided by each system are largely the
same.
The rules for consequences, then, spell out a natural deduction system.
The elements of this system are inferences—that is, consequences
3 7
—which can be used to license arguments. Hence the rules for
consequences state legitimate inference-schemata. But what makes any
inference-scheme legitimate, or even preferable to another? What, i f
anything, makes inferences valid?
128 PETER K I N G
4. F O R M A L V A L I D I T Y
The mediaeval consensus on legitimate inference-schemata does not
extend to the explanation of legitimacy itself. In the first half of the
fourteenth century we find three competing accounts of what makes a
consequence legitimate. The first is little more than a suggestion, similar
to a modern informal characterization of deductive validity. The second
explains the legitimacy of A V B modally, such that it is impossible for A
to be true and B false; this account, then as now, is the favored view. But
it is not without its problems. Hence a third account, based on
substitutivity, was specifically designed to capture formal validity. We'll
3 8
consider each in turn.
First, Robert Fland opens his Consequentiae by giving rules for
knowing when consequences are formal, which is the case "when the
consequent is understood in the antecedent formally" (§1). This psychological
or epistemic account seems resistant to logical treatment, and, on
the face of it, more appropriate to characterizing implication—relevant
implication at that—than inference. (To say nothing of its circularity!)
However, around 1370 Richard Lavenham took up the same train of
thought in his Consequentiae, and his remarks, though equally brief, give
us a clue how to interpret Fland (§2):
A consequence is formal when the consequent necessarily belongs to the
understanding of the antecedent (necessario est de intellectu antecedentis), as it is
in the case of syllogistic consequence, and in many enthymematic consequences.
The tip-off that we are dealing with inference is seen in Lavenham's
mention of syllogisms and enthymemes, which are types of argument.
Lavenham is thus claiming that in an argument the understanding of the
conclusion (consequent) necessarily belongs to the premisses
(antecedent), which is a reasonable way to gloss Fland's criterion. The
Lavenham-Fland account, then, is recognizably the same as our informal
characterization of a valid argument as one in which the conclusion is
"contained" in the premisses, and a cousin of the view that deductive
inference is not ampliative—unlike, say, inductive inference—since the
conclusion contains no more information than the premisses. Whether
such an account can be made sufficiently precise for logical treatment is
another matter. (Modern information-theoretic accounts of deducibility
have not met with general acceptance.) Fland is alone among logicians in
the first half of the fourteenth century in mentioning it, and so we shall
set it aside for now.
M E D I A E V A L PROOF T H E O R Y 1300-1350 129
The second and most common account of inferential validity among
our authors is modal: the consequence A Y B is legitimate when it is
impossible for A to be true and B false. More precisely, the modal
criterion spells out at least a necessary condition for consequences in
general to be legitimate. The intuition at work here is familiar. Modal
accounts of logical consequence date back to Aristotle, and live on today
in Tarskian model-theoretic explanations of logical consequence that
take possible worlds to be the models in which an interpretation is
evaluated.4 0
Well, with Aristotle on one side and Tarski on the other,
how did the mediaeval logicians of the first half of the fourteenth
century explicate the modal account of consequence?
A battery of distinctions were available that would allow them to
construct a fairly precise nonmathematical analogue of Tarskian
satisfaction. Jean Buridan offers a clear and lucid presentation of the
material, so I'll concentrate on his exposition. Roughly, a sentence is
true for Buridan when what it says is the case. (This claim has to be
tweaked for tense and quality, of course, but we can ignore such niceties
for now.) Thus a consequence A Y B is legitimate when it is impossible
for what A says to be the case and for what B says not to be the case.
More precisely, it is impossible for the situation that B describes not to
hold in the situation that A describes. These situations may be
alternative possibilities. Buridan distinguishes between situations that a
sentence may describe and also belong to, and those situations which it
may describe but not belong to. This is his well-known distinction
between sentences that are possibly-true and those that are (merely)
possible.4 1
For instance, the sentence "No sentence is negative" is
possible but not possibly-true, because it describes a possible situation but
cannot belong to it. Hence we can clearly distinguish a sentence from the
situation it describes and also from its truth-value with respect to that
situation. In modern terminology, a possible situation functions as a
model, and sentences are assigned truth-values relative to the model.
Such an assignment of truth-values is a nonmathematical version of
Tarskian satisfaction. Hence the consequence A Y B is legitimate when it
is impossible for A to be true and B false, that is, when there is no
situation in which A is assigned truth and B falsity. Inferential legitimacy
is a function of the truth-value of sentences with respect to situations.
The situations are possibilities—possible worlds, if you like. They can
be constructed to evaluate sentences, and were extensively used to do
exactly that, particularly in the case of sophisms, where they supplied a
technique for both modelling and countermodelling: the description of a
130 PETER K I N G
situation (casus) was the starting-point of these investigations. Hence
even if the fine points of Buridan's account were not available to or
accepted by everyone, the common use of possible situations in
sophisms and obligations shows that the philosophical machinery for
explicating the modal account of validity was widely available.
The widespread agreement among mediaeval logicians on the modal
account didn't settle all the philosophical questions, however. Is
quantification over such possibilities, as the modal account seems to
demand, itself a legitimate procedure? What about inference from the
impossible, where by definition there is no possible situation to start
with? But put these difficulties, as challenging as they are, aside for the
moment. There is a deeper worry about the proto-Tarskian theory
sketched here, one recognized in the first half of the fourteenth century.
As it stands, the account of truth (as a satisfaction-relation relative to a
model) incorporated in the modal account has no clear connection with
formal validity—or even with semantics at all.4 2
How does inferential
legitimacy depend on the formal features of sentences or on their
meanings? Consider the three proposals that A 1- B is legitimate when:4 3
(1) the truth of A guarantees the truth of B in virtue of the
meanings of the terms in each
(2) the truth of A guarantees the truth of B in virtue of the forms
of A and B
(3) there is no uniform substitution of nonlogical terminology
that renders A true and B false.
Now to the extent that the meanings of the terms in A and B determine
the situations—the range of possibilities or models—we evaluate our
sentences against, (1) may provide a semantic dimension to the modal
account. Yet (1) will fail to capture formal validity to the extent that
meaning is not a formal feature.44
Inferences such as "Socrates is human;
therefore, Socrates is an animal" are legitimate by (1) but are not
formally valid: they do not hold in virtue of their form but only hold in
virtue of some extrinsic feature, such as the meanings of their terms or
the way the world is. (Thus even metaphysical necessity does not entail
formal validity.) Several mediaeval logicians turned to the theory of
topics to explain such materially valid inferences, sometimes reducing
them to formal ones, sometimes the converse 4 5
In contrast, the account of legitimacy proposed in (2) tries to explain
it by connecting truth and formality. It can even be seen as a special case
of (1), wherein the meanings of a special set of terms—called nowadays
M E D I A E V A L PROOF T H E O R Y 1300-1350 131
the 'logical vocabulary'—constitute the form of a given sentence. O f
course, it isn't clear whether logical vocabulary has meaning at all, even
when taken in combination with other terms (as the mediaeval account
of 'syncategorematic' terms presupposes). But even so there are three
further problems with (2) as an explication of legitimacy. First, the very
move from (1) to (2) is suspect. Why should we be interested in logical
form in the first place? Why not be content with guaranteed truth, for
which (1) is sufficient? It should be an open question whether all validity
is formal validity, but (2) closes the subject. Second, mediaeval and
modern logicians alike have yet to come up with a criterion to identify
the "form" of a sentence that doesn't simply beg the question. What is
the logical form of a definite description? Of a paradoxical liar-like
sentence? O f sentences involving the word "begins"? Third, even i f we
could specify the form of a sentence without begging any questions, we
need to know how formal features determine possibilities.4 6
For
example, suppose that the (logical) form of the sentence "Socrates is
older than Plato" is "x is older than v." Surely not all situations in which
one thing is, or is claimed to be, older than another count as possibilities
relevant to evaluating the original sentence. What bearing does the
situation in which my piano is older than my violin have on Socrates's
being older than Plato? It is not that the net of possibility is cast too
widely—instead, it seems to be miscast. The age of my musical
instruments is simply irrelevant to the respective ages of Socrates and
Plato. Insofar as such possibilities are prescribed by (2), the intuitive
punch of the modal account is lost.
Rather than taking possibilities to be spelled out by the meanings of
terms of a sentence or by the structure of a sentence, we could instead
look directly at the truth-value of sentences generated by altering a
given sentences's (nonlogical) terminology. This is the key intuition
behind the substitutional account of legitimacy presented in (3). We can
best judge legitimacy by seeing whether an inference holds in terms other
than those in which it is originally couched. (Our ability to judge the
truth-value of the candidate sentences is assumed.) Furthermore, to the
extent that we can identify some terms as part of the logical vocabulary
and so as elements of the form of the sentence, (3) will be a formal
account as well. Hence Buridan, for example, endorses (3) as the correct
account of legitimacy, specifically linking it to formality.4 7
Uniform
subsitutivity, of the sort proposed by Buridan, is the third account of
inferential validity. He is clear that (3) goes beyond the modal account
in at least two ways. First, it applies equally to material (non-formal)
132 PETER K I N G
consequences; thus the formality of an inference is a feature that goes
beyond its necessity, neither explained by nor reducible to it. Second, it
takes legitimacy to be a function of truth-value relative to a set o f
terms, namely the nonlogical vocabulary, rather than appealing to
possibilities. The third account of inferential validity therefore takes a
decidedly linguistic and non-metaphysical approach.
The mediaeval consensus on a proto-Tarskian account of satisfaction,
then, conceals deep divergences in the attempt to explain legitimacy. It
may be worthwhile to change directions in pursuing this problem. Rather
than looking more closely at the nature of formal and material inference
(a topic on which there doesn't seem to be much agreement among
mediaeval logicians), we can try to make some headway by understanding
how mediaeval logicians reasoned about possible situations and
alternatives. Since consequences license arguments, where such
possibilities are found, we can start there; after examining the nature of
arguments I'll conclude with some reflections on formality and the
logical enterprise.
5. A R G U M E N T A N D A R G U M E N T A T I O N
Let me pick up a thread from §2 and return to the relation between
conditionals and consequences. They are logically distinct notions. Are
they correlated in any way? At the beginning of our period the question
seems to be ignored, but by the end two schools of thought have
emerged. On the one hand, Ockham and his followers hold that
conditionals and consequences are logically interchangeable. In Summa
logicae 2.31, Ockham declares that since a conditional is equivalent
(aequiualet) to a consequence he'll just talk about the latter (347.2-5).
So too the Logica ad rudium 2.76. The treatise De consequentiis §7
gives us the other direction: every legitimate consequence is equivalent
to a true conditional (Green-Pedersen 1982, 93). The moral is
eventually drawn in the fifteenth rule of the Liber consequentiarum 2:4 8
Every consequence is equivalent to a conditional composed of the antecedent and
consequent of the given consequence with ' i f put in front of the antecedent, and
conversely every conditional is also equivalent to a consequence composed of the
antecedent and consequent of the given conditional with 'therefore' put in front of
the consequent.
M E D I A E V A L PROOF T H E O R Y 1300-1350 133
This 'mediaeval deduction theorem' permits the logician to pass between
conditional and inferential formulations of the same claim, without any
logical baggage getting lost in the transfer, as it were.
On the other hand, conditionals and consequences might be thought to
differ in ways that prevent them from being simply exchanged for one
another. This is the position of Jean Buridan (and Albert of Saxony, as
usual, in his wake). He sketches the difference in his Summulae de
dialectica 7.4.5, when he disentangles the sloppy use of 'consequence' in
place of 'conditional':4 9
Note that 'consequence' is twofold: (1) a conditional sentence, which asserts neither
its antecedent nor its consequent (e.g. "if an ass flies an ass has wings") but only
asserts that the one follows from the other, and such a consequence is not an
argument since it doesn't prove anything; (2) an argument wherein the antecedent is
known and better-known than the consequent, which asserts the antecedent and on
that basis implies the consequent as an assertion. Furthermore, in a conditional we
use ' i f and in an argument 'therefore.'
Conditionals do not involve the assertion of their parts, whereas
consequences do. Buridan makes the same point earlier as regards
syllogisms (Summulae de dialectica 1.7.3):50
The syllogism differs from the conditional sentence too, because in the conditional
sentence its categorical parts aren't put forward in the manner of an assertion (i.e.
affirmatively), whereas they are put forward in the manner of an assertion in
syllogisms—e.g. that every B is A and every C is B, and the conclusion that every
C is A is drawn in the manner of an assertion. Thus we say that a syllogism with
false premisses is materially defective, which shouldn't be said of the conditional
"If an ass is flying, an ass has wings."
A n argument, as noted in §1, does not make a statement. Yet it does
license the making of a statement by anyone who accepts its premisses,
namely the detachable statement of its conclusion. Implication does not
work like this: conditionals do make statements, namely statements
about the relation between the antecedent and the consequent, but unlike
arguments they do not license further statements. Hence, for Buridan,
consequences and conditionals are not interchangeable.5 1
Buridan's view is that accepting or rejecting premisses, committing
oneself to an inference, warranting further freestanding statements, and
other activities that we might broadly call "dialectical" are partially
constitutive of the sense of an argument.5 2
However, we don't have to
believe that giving an argument will automatically commit us to asserting
its conclusion in order to take Buridan's point. Even Buridan didn't
think so—otherwise, we wouldn't be able to draw conclusions from an
134 PETER K I N G
opponent's views to refute him. Instead, the point well-taken from
Buridan's discussion is that making an argument necessarily involves
taking a dialectical stance. What an agent is doing dialectically in
stringing together statements will depend, at least in part, on whether
the agent is (say) accepting the statements, or rejecting them, or
granting them temporarily, or is in doubt about what to do. Which
commitments the agent has will depend on which dialectical stance he
adopts.
The factors listed here as making up an agent's dialectical stance are,
of course, precisely those that enter into obligationes. They enable arguments
to be what they are in the first place, namely a kind of activity in
which we do things with statements. And, as such, they are ways of doing
things with statements. For arguments are not independent objects that
can be analyzed apart from the contexts in which they occur. Part o f
their sense—or at least part of what it is to string statements together in
an inference-making performance—is arguably constituted by these
obligational attitudes (for want of a better description).5 4
Obligational
treatises are, among other things explored at length in this volume,
conscious attempts to work out how certain obligational attitudes are
related to inferences. They are efforts to explore the logical features o f
arguments—dialectical performances—found in the wild.
To be sure, we can domesticate obligational attitudes to some extent.
If we consider arguments solely from the point of view of accepted (or
perhaps even conceded) premisses, a theory of valid consequence that
makes only tacit reference to its dialectical origins can be constructed.
This is, in essence, the theory of the syllogism. But the task of the
mediaeval logician is to examine arguments wherever they may be found,
including their natural habitats, and on that reading obligations are part
of logical theory proper. Yet obligational attitudes are not, or not in any
obvious way, formal features of arguments—that is, they aren't part o f
the logical form of an argument as such; we seem to be able to talk about
arguments without referring to their dialectical contexts. To get straight
on how obligations are part of the logical enterprise, we need to look a
bit more closely at formality and its connection with logic, both
mediaeval and modern. In so doing we'll get a better idea of the logical
enterprise generally.
M E D I A E V A L PROOF T H E O R Y 1300-1350 135
CONCLUSION
Modern logicians, who spend much of their time either devising logical
systems that are mathematically-defined objects or investigating the
properties of such systems (metatheory), are engaged in a fundamentally
modern enterprise. Mediaeval logicians were in no position to do either
of these tasks. Yet mediaeval logic is still logic, after all; its relation to
modem logic is not like the relation of alchemy to chemistry. The glory
of modern logic is rather that it succeeds in treating logic
mathematically. But logic is not intrinsically mathematical; it would
have little past before Principia mathematica i f it were. Yet the
influence of mathematics on logic has undeniably changed its character:
mediaeval and modern logic are overlapping but distinct enterprises.
Each is concerned with logic as in some sense the study of correct
reasoning, but without more content this slogan doesn't get us very far.
What more can be said? Well, mediaeval and modern logic both attempt
to be rigorous and systematic. And, more importantly, each is a formal
discipline. That is, they are concerned with studying properties of formal
features, e.g. determining which inferences hold in virtue of the logical
form of the premisses and of the conclusion (truth-preserving formal
inferences). Modern logic is formal and formalized (symbolic); mediaeval
logic is formal but not formalized. To this extent Ockham and Tarski
are engaged in a common endeavor and the history of logic stretches
back to Aristotle.
Mediaeval logic is also nonformal.5 5
That is, mediaeval logic deals
with inferences and assertions that do not hold in virtue of their formal
features as well as those that do. Here Ockham and Tarski part ways:
modern logic concentrates exclusively on formal properties whereas
mediaeval logic is more inclusive. Some sense of the scope of mediaeval
logic can be gotten by looking at the variety of subjects falling within its
scope: semantics, reference, syncategoremata, syllogistic, consequences,
topics, sophisms, paradoxes, obligations, and fallacies. Yet I think there
is a single conception of logic here, with consequences at its heart. It is
this. Mediaeval logic is the enterprise of devising theories about
inference. Inferences may be formal or material, legitimate or
illegitimate, and are found in different dialectical circumstances. The
unity of mediaeval logic is grounded in its conception of inference
(consequence), the key to nonformal logic. Now mediaeval logic is
recognizably related to modern mathematical logic, since it studies
formal legitimate inferences, the sole subject of modern logic. But it also
136 PETER K I N G
studies much else besides, such as illegitimate inferences (the theory o f
fallacies).
Whether the mediaeval conception of logic as the nonformal study o f
inference is a worthy competitor to the modern mathematical
conception of logic is another question. We cannot make a start on
answering it until we recognize the centrality of the notion of inference
in mediaeval logic. A n obvious first step in that process is clarifying the
notion of inference itself. As I have argued here, this was accomplished
in the first half of the fourteenth century through a natural deduction
system and articulated in discussions of consequences, which are the
heart of argument and, by extension, the very heart of (mediaeval) logic
itself.5 6
Ohio State University
NOTES
1
All translations are mine. I what follows I cite the Latin text only when it is not
readily available (e.g. for much of Buridan's Summulae de dialectica), when there
is a textual difficulty, or when a point depends on its original phrasing. The texts
on which this study is based are all listed in Part (A) of the Bibliography; when I
speak of "the available literature" these are the works I have in mind. GreenPedersen
1983 catalogues several other texts about consequences that exist only in
manuscript. The available literature seems to fall roughly into four groups. [1] The
anonymous two earliest treatises on consequences, along with Walter Burley's De
consequentiis and his De puritate artis logicae—the longer version being
influenced by Ockham. [2] William of Ockham's Summa logicae, whose influence
can be seen in the Elementarium logicae and the Tractatus minor logicae (formerly
ascribed to Ockham himself), the anonymous treatises Liber consequentiarum and
Logica "Ad Rudium", and the unusual commentary De consequentiis possibly
written by Bradwardine. [3] Jean Buridan's Tractatus de consequentiis and
Summulae de dialectica, whose influence can be seen in Albert of Saxony's
Perutilis logica or Marsilius of Inghen's De consequentiis. [4] The Consequentiae
of Robert Fland and of Richard Ferrybridge, dating from the close of the first half
of the fourteenth century, which have many affinities with the later works of (for
example) Richard Billingham, Richard Lavenham, and Ralph Strode.
2
See Jaskowski 1934 and Gentzen 1935; Prawitz 1965 gives a modern presentation
of natural deduction systems. The claim defended here is the mediaeval counterpart
of the case put forward for Aristotle's logic initially by Smiley 1973 and Corcoran
1974, since developed in Lear 1980, Thorn 1981, and Smith 1989. Note the
limited scope of my thesis: whatever consequences may have been before 1300 and
whatever they may have become after 1350, in the first half of the fourteenth
century they constituted a natural deduction system. An admirably clear statement
of this position is given in Moody 1953, 15: "The theory of consequence, taken as
M E D I A E V A L PROOF T H E O R Y 1300-1350 137
a whole, constituted a formal specification of inference-conditions for the
formulated language." Kneale and Kneale 1962, 4.5, describe "a change of fashion"
in writings on consequences around 1300, "something like that from Aristotle's
presentation of syllogistic theory by means of conditional statements to Boethius'
presentation by means of inference schemata" (277). In these historians natural
deduction has been glimpsed, but only as in a mirror darkly; I intend to show it to
the reader face-to-face.
3
Three recent examples, each a near miss. Boh 1982, 300 writes: "Implication,
entailment, and inference are all distinct from one another... Nevertheless, medieval
logicians disconcertingly use the single notion of consequence to cover all three of
these relationships between propositions." (They did no such thing, as we shall see
in §§1-3 below.) In King 1985, 59-60 I argued that consequences have features of
conditionals as well as inferences, and hence are neither fish nor fowl. Adams 1987,
458-490, who quite properly renders consequentiae as 'inferences,' discusses at
length whether Ockham's rules define a version of strict implication.
4
Most modern interpretations of mediaeval rules for consequences take them at
best to present axioms, or perhaps theorems, of a connexive logic (as in MacCall
1966).
5
Aristotle, De interpretatione 5 17a21-22 (Boethius's translation): "Harum autem
haec quidem simplex est enuntiatio, ut aliquid de aliquo uel aliquid ab aliquo..."
See also De interpretatione 6 17a25-26: "Affumatio uero est enuntiatio alicuius de
aliquo, negatio uero enuntiatio alicuius ab aliquo."
6
This account oversimplifies the complex nature of conditionals, even the
"ordinary" present-tense indicative conditional. See Woods 1997 or the articles in
Jackson 1991 for an account of some of the difficulties. There are other reasons for
distinguishing conditionals from inferences; the argument in Carroll 1895 shows
that axioms need to be supplemented by rules of inference. Haack 1976 argues that
the need for a justification of deduction outlined in Dummett 1973 generalizes
Carroll's argument into a dilemma, so that there is either an infinite regress or
circularity. But these arguments were unknown in the fourteenth century, so I will
not treat them here. (This is not to say that mediaeval logicians did not recognize
the need to justify particular inference-rules; they surely did, but just as surely
didn't see the enterprise of doing so as deeply problematic.)
7
The Deduction Theorem can be proved from the axioms:
A (B A)
along with detachment, by induction on proof length. Modern logical systems
sharply distinguish syntactic consequence (I-) from semantic consequence (¥); the
mediaeval analogue is discussed in §4.
8
A sentence may be categorical whether it be affirmative or negative (the quality of
a sentence is part of its logical form); universal, particular, or indefinite (so too the
quantity); assertoric or modal; even—within limits—internally complex.
9
Negation is not a connective: sentential negation is accomplished by a
categorically distinct copula, so that 'is' and 'is not' are two different functors
(mutatis mutandis through all the tenses and modes). The mediaeval account of
compound sentences doesn't precisely match the modern notion of widest scope,
since the latter has mathematical properties the former lacks, e.g. embedding of
138 PETER K I N G
formulae at arbitrary depth. The precise kind of statement made by compound
sentences is a matter of some complexity. We need not explore it here. It is not the
details but the bare fact that conditional sentences make statements (and thereby are
true or false) that is significant.
1 0
More exactly: sentences consist in words but are not simply sequences of words;
the combination of words into a sentence used to make a statement goes beyond
anything in the words themselves—sentences are a way of doing something with
words (namely making a statement). Likewise, arguments are a way of doing
something with statements, as noted above.
1 1
The third part analyzes arguments in general, as Ockham tells us in Summa
logicae 3-1A (359.2-3).
1 2
The anonymous Logica ad Rudium, structured in the same fashion as the Sutmna
logicae, likewise treats conditionals as a kind of compound sentence (2.76-78) and
consequences as a form of argument (3.64-84). So too the Tractatus minor logicae
2.2 for conditionals and Book 5 for consequences, as well as the Elementarium
logicae 2.16 and Book 6. Now Ockham and other logicians sometimes restrict
consequences to nonsyllogistic inferences, but this is a matter of terminology and
not doctrine: Ockham expressly says that it is a terminological convenience.
1 3
Buridan's Summulae de dialectica is divided into the following treatises: [1]
introductory material and sentences; [2] predicables; [3] categories or categorematic
expressions; [4] supposition; [5] syllogisms; [6] dialectical topics; [7] fallacies; [8]
demonstrations; and sometimes [9] sophisms. Although there is no treatise devoted
to consequences, Buridan does discuss them in [5]-[6], whereas he describes and
defines conditionals in [1].
1 4
The only possible exception: in Summulae de dialectica 7.4.5 (discussed in §5),
Buridan does say that 'consequence' can mean either a conditional sentence or an
inference. But his entire discussion of consequences uses the second sense, not the
first, which he never mentions again.
1 5
Consequences in fact have a distinct property: they can be legitimate, and thereby
they may hold or be valid. This will be discussed in §§3-4.
1 6
In §69, Green-Pedersen renders the text "Exemplum primae: si tu es Romae, ergo
illud quod est falsum est uerum..." adding the ergo with O (rather than omitting it
with CL). But Burley is giving here an example of a conditional, not a
consequence; the ergo should be suppressed.
1 7
"Notandum est quod haec est una condicionahs uera et necessaria: si homo est
asinus, homo est animal brutum."
1 8
A fourth passage can be set aside as merely terminological. In the second
Anonymi de consequentiis §19 (Green-Pedersen 1980), a mention is made of a 'false
consequence'—an instance of asserting the consequent—but this is plainly an
extension of 'false' to inferences that are fallacious, not meant to ascribe a truthvalue;
it is no more to be taken seriously than Burley's willingness to speak of the
same fallacy as being a "false rule" in both versions of his De puritate artis logicae
(200.16-17 [shorter] and 62.14-15 [longer]).
1 9
In speaking of material consequences, Pseudo-Scotus says that some are true
simpliciter and some ut nunc—the former can be reduced to formal consequences
by the assumption of a necessary proposition, whereas the latter refer to
consequences that hold contingently, not at all times. Yet by the time he gets to ut
M E D I A E V A L PROOF T H E O R Y 1300-1350 139
nunc consequences he switches back to speaking of legitimacy, never returning to
truth again. (See the translation included in this volume.) It seems clear that this is
no more than a slip of the pen, since nothing in his discussion turns on whether
legitimacy or truth is at stake and the usage is completely isolated.
2 0
Elizabeth Karger has proposed that Buridan is here stipulating that he will use
'consequence' to pick out only true conditionals, and hence that consequences do
have truth-value. This reading is possible, but, I think, not borne out by other
evidence: nowhere else in the Tractatus de consequentiis does Buridan ever rely on
consequences having truth-value. The passage is surely anomalous.
2 1
"Et uidetur mihi quod talis hypothetica coniungens categoricas per 'ergo' debet
similiter reputari falsa si non sit necessaria consequentia, quae designatur per istam
dictionem 'ergo,' et quod etiam sit falsa simpliciter loquendo si habeat aliquam
Draemissam falsam."
The Elementarium logicae 2.16 contrasts consequences and conditionals by thenpossession
of different properties (94.3-8): "Just as a consequence can be legitimate
even though neither of its sentences is true, and even though the antecedent is false
and the consequent true—but is never legitimate if its antecedent is true and its
consequent false—so too a compound conditional sentence can be true even if
neither of the categorical sentences of which it is composed is true, and even if the
first is false and the second true, but not if the first is true and the second false."
Modern logicians have been largely successful with 'consequent' (although it
sometimes carries the sense of 'important' outside logical circles) but not at all
with 'antecedent,' which still has a broad range of uses not tied to either
conditionals or consequents—for instance, in speaking about one's background or
genealogy.
4
See The Oxford Latin Dictionary 1982 at 138AB s.v. antecedo and also at
413BC s.v. consequens I consequor. Note that the constituents of a Gentzen
sequent in a natural deduction system are called the 'antecedent' and the
'succedent'—acceptable translations of antecedens and consequens\
2 5
Burley refers explicitly to the "syllogistic antecedent" (antecedens syllogisticum)
of a consequence in the longer version of his De puritate artis logicae (65.7).
2 6
Buridan repeats the point at Tractatus de consequentiis 1.3.12 (22.61). The same
claim is made in passing by the Pseudo-Scotus at the start of q.10; see also
Pinborg 1972, 170.
2 7
A third reply—that Buridan can be discounted as a single voice against many
others—will not do for two reasons. First, Buridan was a superb logicians, and
voices must be weighed rather than counted. Second, he may not be a lone voice;
the longer version of Burley's De puritate artis logicae seems to classify
consequences under the generic heading of conditional compound sentences (the
first part of the second treatise), although the incomplete nature of the text makes it
hard to put much weight on its structural divisions.
28
Summulae de dialectica 5.1.3: "Respondeo quod licet syllogismus sit
compositus ex pluribus orationibus, tamen est una propositio hypothetica,
coniungens conclusionem praemissis per hanc coniunctionem 'ergo.' Et potest
reduci ad speciem propositionum condicionalium, quia sicut condicionalis est una
consequentia, ita et syllogismus; unde syllogismus posset formari per modum
140 PETER K I N G
unius condicionalis sic 'si omne animal est substantia et omnis homo est animal,
omnis homo est substantia."'
29
There are special challenges for Buridan, as a nominalist, to distinguish
sentences (particular mental tokenings perhaps correlated with individual utterances
or inscriptions) from the statements they make. We need not pursue this point here.
3 0
Consequences are identified either (quasi)-syntactically as sentences connected by
an illative particle, or as the relation obtaining among such sentences—for example,
in §1 of the first anonymous treatise on consequences in Green-Pedersen 1980, a
consequence is defined as a "relationship (habitudo) between an antecedent and a
consequent". (Note that Green-Pedersen 1983 calls the second definition 'semantic'
and says that one or the other is given in all the writings on consequences, that is,
in both the published and unpublished manuscript texts.)
3 1
See §2 of the De consequentiis possibly written by Bradwardine: "Every
consequence is taken to underwrite* some argument" {*probandum L; GreenPedersen
adopts producendum from the badly defective V).
3 2
Mediaeval logicians, like modern logicians, vacillated about whether to say that
a fallacious inference was an inference, and hence whether 'legitimate inference' was
pleonastic. The sense is usually clear from context. I'll follow the mediaeval lead
here.
33
The first Anonymi de consequentiis § 18 (Green-Pedersen 1980, 7.12-15).
3 4
Detachment is a rule of inference and not to be confused with the law of
nropositional logic (A & (A —• B)) —• B.
Note that Ockham's first rule treats the relation between the terms 'animal' and
'man' as a formal feature. Modern first-order logic does not normally respect such
relationships, but could do so in a number of ways: indexing or sorting the termvariables;
adding semantic rules along the lines of meaning-postulates; and the like.
Are such consequences formal? How would we decide? What difference does it
make? See §4 below.
3 6
I badly mangled the analysis of Buridan's account of the reductio-mcthod in
King 1985, 73-74 (not least by using conditional form in my account).
3 7
There is some looseness here: do we identify the consequence as the inferential
force of the argument, or as the argument constituted by the inferential force? (Is the
inference the whole formula A Y B or just the open formula ... Y — ?) Different
mediaeval authors answered the question differently.
3 8
The three accounts canvassed in this section have usually been identified as truthconditions
for implication. As such, they seem to spell out intensional
(psychological), modal (strict entailment), and formal conceptions of implication.
However, they are accounts of validity rather than truth-conditions, as we shall see.
3 9
Mediaeval logicians drew several distinctions among kinds of consequences,
such as the distinction between consequence simpliciter and consequence ut nunc.
Does the modal account of validity range over times or just possibilities at a time?
I'm inclined to the latter, and that the common mediaeval view was that "all
consequences are necessary" (as the De consequentiis possibly written by
Bradwardine asserts in §7). I will proceed as though the question were settled, but
it deserves more attention than I can give it here.
4 0
The success of the model-theoretic notion of logical consequence, derived from
(but not identical to) the version presented in Tarski 1935, has been challenged
M E D I A E V A L PROOF T H E O R Y 1300-1350 141
recently in Etchemendy 1990. The discussion of these matters in Shapiro 1998 is
extremely helpful, and I make use of his distinctions among accounts of logical
consequence in what follows.
4 1
Prior 1969 is the locus classicus. The distinction is drawn from the first two
chapters of Buridan's Sophismata 8.
4 2
This point can be pressed against Tarski, and is vigorously argued in
Etchemendy 1990.
4 3
Taken from Shapiro 1997, 132: his (6), (9), and (8) respectively.
4 4
Modern logicians have made various attempts to treat meaning as a formal
feature: see n.35 above. Mediaeval logicians made no such comparable attempt,
although they were divided on how to treat certain kinds of structured meaningrelations
(notably between subordinate and superordinate elements in a categorial
line). One technique was to use the theory of topics—see the following note.
4 5
See Green-Pedersen 1984 and Stump 1989 for discussion of the use of topics in
this period. (Interestingly, Tarski also speaks of "material consequences": Shapiro
1998, 148.) Burley, for example, says in the longer version of his De puritate artis
logicae that every consequence holds in virtue of a logical topic (75.35-76.10).
Ockham's awkward doctrine of intrinsic and extrinsic middles may be seen as
addressing some of these worries.
4 6
See Shapiro 1998, 143 on interpretational and representational semantics.
47
Tractatus de consequentiis 22.5-9. See also Summulae de dialectica 1.6.1: "Et
quia nunc locutum est de consequentia formali et materiali, uidendum est quo
modo conueniant et differant: conueniunt enim in hoc quod impossibile est
antecedens esse uerum consequente exsistente falso; sed differant quia consequentia
'formalis' uocatur quae si ex quibuscumque terminis formarentur, propositiones
similis formae ualeret similiter consequentia." Buridan's account of substitutivity
is similar to Bolzano 1837.
4 8
Schupp 1988, 123.198-203: "Decima quinta regula est haec quod omnis
consequentia aequiualet condicionali compositae ex antecedente et consequente
illius consequentiae cum nota condicionalis praeposita antecedenti, et econuerso
omnis condicionalis etiam consequentiae compositae ex antecedente et consequente
illius condicionalis cum nota consequentiae praeposita consequenti."
4 9
"Deinde notat duplicem esse consequentiam, scilicet unam quae est propositio
condicionalis, et ilia nec asserit antecedens nec asserit consequens (ut 'si asinus
uolat, asinus habet alas'), sed solum asserit quod hoc sequitur ad illud. Et ideo
talis consequentia non est argumentum; nihil enim concludit. Aha consequentia est
argumentum si antecedens sit notum et notius consequente, quae asserit antecedens
et ob hoc infert assertiue consequens. In condicionali autem utimur hac
coniunctione 'si' et in argumento hac coniunctione 'ergo.'"
5 0
"Et etiam syllogismus differt a propositione condicionali, quia in propositione
condicionali nullo modo categoricae proponuntur modo assertiuo, id est
affirmatiuo, sed in syllogismis proponuntur modo assertiuo, ut quod omne B est A
et omne C est B, et concluditur assertiue quod omne C est A. Et ideo dicimus
syllogismus ex falsis praemissis peccare in materia, quod non sic est dicendum de
ista condicionali 'si asinus uolat, asinus habet pennas.'"
5 1
Modern logicians are divided over whether arguments do in fact license
freestanding occurrences of their conclusions. For instance, if we think of logical
142 PETER K I N G
consequence along purely syntactic lines, the formula A f- B says only that B can
be deduced from A—a claim that seems to carry no commitment to B (or
presuppose any endorsement of A). This is evidence that Buridan and other
mediaeval logicians did not think of consequence as simple deducibility.
5 2
Perhaps a more fine-grained approach would be useful here. David Kaplan's
distinction of propositional context, character, and content allows us to state
Buridan's claim more exactly; dialectical activities fix the character of propositions
as they occur in arguments; they do not enter into their content.
5 3
Some of the dialectical features described here have been explored at length in
Brandom 1994. But his project of "inferential semantics" is not the mediaeval one:
to insist that arguments have some irreducible social features is a far cry from
maintaining that (all) meaning is constituted by inferential roles and permissible
moves of our language-games.
3 4
If arguments depend on obligational attitudes for their sense, it is misleading to
represent them as operators that extend or enrich an independent logical
system—as, for example, in Boh 1993 (for epistemic operators).
5
This is not the same as our modern conception of informal logic, which is at
best the general study of deductive and inductive reasoning, the latter based on
probability and statistics. Unfortunately, "informal logic" is usually taken to be
synonymous with "critical thinking"; equal parts of rhetoric, traditional fallacies,
and epistemic good sense. There is nothing particularly logical about informal
logic taken in this sense.
56
I'd like to thank Anna Greco, Elizabeth Karger, Stewart Shapiro, William
Taschek, and Mikko Yrjonsuuri for helpful comments and conversations.
REFERENCES
A. Mediaeval texts 1300-1350
Anonymous. Anonymi de consequentiis (ca. 1300), edited in Green-Pedersen 1980,
4-11.
Anonymous. Anonymi de consequentiis (ca. 1300), edited in Green-Pedersen 1980,
12-28.
Anonymous. Liber consequentiarum (1330-1340), edited in Schupp 1988,
104-171.
Anonymous. De consequentiis (1325-1340), (ed.) Niels J0rgen Green-Pedersen in
"Bradwardine(?) On Ockham's Doctrine of Consequences: An Edition," Cahiers
de I'institut du moyen-dge grec et latin 42 (1982), 85-150.
Anonymous. Logica "Ad Rudium" (1335), (ed.) L. M . De Rijk, (Artistarium 1),
Nijmegen, Ingenium 1981.
Buridan, Jean. Tractatus de consequentiis (1335), (ed.) Hubert Hubien in Iohannis
Buridani tractatus de consequentiis, (Philosophes medievaux 16), Louvain,
Publications Universitaires 1976. Translated in King 1985.
Buridan, Jean. Summulae de dialectica (1340s?). References are to book, chapter,
and section number. The second book has been edited by L M. De Rijk as the
Summulae de praedicabilibus (Nijmegen, Ingenium 1995). The third book has
M E D I A E V A L PROOF T H E O R Y 1300-1350 143
been edited by E. P. Bos as the Summulae in Praedicamenta (Nijmegen,
Ingenium 1994). For other parts of the text I have used the unpublished
transcription of Hubert Hubien, employed in the critical editions, and provide
the Latin in the notes.
Burley, Walter. De consequents (1300), (ed.) Niels Jergen Green-Pedersen in
"Walter Burley's 'De Consequentiis': An Edition," Franciscan Studies n.s. 40
(1980), 102-166.
Burley, Walter. De puritate artis logicae (tractatus brevior) (early 1320s), (ed.)
Philotheus Boehner O.F.M. in Walter Burley: De puritate artis logicae,
Tractatus Longior. With a Revised Edition of the Tractatus Brevior, St.
Bonaventure: The Franciscan Institute 1955, 199-260.
Burley, Walter. De puritate artis logicae (tractatus longior) (later 1320s), (ed.)
Philotheus Boehner O.F.M. in Walter Burley: De puritate artis logicae,
Tractatus Longior. With a Revised Edition of the Tractatus Brevior, St.
Bonaventure, The Franciscan Institute 1955, 1-197.
Ferrybridge, Richard. Consequentiae (ca. 1350), printed in Consequentiae Strodi
cum commento Alexandri Sermonetae. Declarationes Gaetani in easdem
consequentias. Dubia magistri Pauli Pergulensis. Obligationes eiusdem Strodi.
Consequentiae Ricardi de Ferabrich. Expositio Gaetani super easdem, Venetiis
1507.
Fland, Robert. Consequentiae (1350s?), (ed.) Paul Spade in "Robert Fland's
Consequentiae: An Edition," Mediaeval Studies 38 (1976), 54-84.
Pseudo-Ockham. Tractatus minor logicae (ca. 1340-1347), originally edited by
Eligius M . Buytaert; revised by Gedeon Gal and Joachim Giermek, printed in
William of Ockham, Opera philosophica VII (opera dubia et spuria), St.
Bonaventure, The Franciscan Institute 1988, 1-57.
Pseudo-Ockham. Elementarium logicae (ca. 1340-1347), originally edited by
Eligius M . Buytaert; revised by Gedeon Gal and Joachim Giermek, printed in
William of Ockham, Opera philosophica VII (opera dubia et spuria), St.
Bonaventure, The Franciscan Institute 1988, 58-304.
Pseudo-Scotus (John of Cornwall?). Super librum primum et secundum Priorum
Analyticorum Aristotelis quaestiones (around 1350), printed and wrongly
ascribed to Scotus in Joannis Duns Scoti Doctoris Subtilis Ordinis Minorum
opera omnia, ed. Luke Wadding, Lyon 1639; republished, with only slight
alterations, by L. Vives, Paris 1891-1895. Question 10 is translated in the
present volume.
William of Ockham. Summa logicae (1323). Edited by Philotheus Boehner
O.F.M., Gedeon Gal OF.M., Stephanus Brown, Opera philosophica I, St.
Bonaventure, The Franciscan Institute 1974.
B. Selected mediaeval texts 1350-1400
Albert of Saxony. Perutilis logica (1370s), Venetiis 1522, Reprinted in Documenta
Semiotica 6. Hildesheim, Georg Olms 1974.
Lavenham, Richard. Consequentiae (1370), (ed.) Paul Spade in "Five Logical
Tracts by Richard Lavenham," in Essays in Honor of Anton Charles Pegis, ed.
144 PETER K I N G
J. R. O'Donnell, Toronto, University of Toronto Press 1974, 70-124 (text
99-112).
Strode, Ralph. Tractatus de consequentiis (1360?), text and translation in W. K.
Seaton, An Edition and Translation of the Tractatus de consequentiis of Ralph
Strode, Ph.D. Dissertation, University of California at Berkeley 1973. Ann
Arbor, University Microfilms 1974.
C. Modern works
Adams, Marilyn, 1987. William Ockham, 2 volumes, Notre Dame, Indiana,
University of Notre Dame Press.
Boh, Ivan, 1962. "A Study in Burley: Tractatus de regulis generalibus
consequentiarum," in The Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic 3, 83-101.
Boh, Ivan, 1982. "Consequences," in The Cambridge History of Later Medieval
Philosophy, Norman Kretzmann, Anthony Kenny, Jan Pinborg, eds. Cambridge,
Cambridge University Press.
Boh, Ivan, 1993. Epistemic Logic in the Later Middle Ages, London, Routledge &
Kegan Paul.
Bolzano, Bernard 1837. Wissenschaftslehre (4 vols.), Leipzig, Felix Meiner.
Bos, E. P., 1976. "John Buridan and Marsilius of Inghen on Consequences," in
Jan Pinborg (ed.), The Logic of John Buridan, Acts of the Third European
Symposium on Medieval Logic and Semantics, Copenhagen, Museum
Tusculanum.
Brandom, Robert B., 1994. Making It Explicit. Reasoning, Representing, and
Discursive Commitment, Cambridge, MA., Harvard University Press.
Carroll, Lewis, 1985. "What the Tortoise Said to Achilles," Mind 4, 278-280.
Corcoran, John, 1973. "Aristotle's Natural Deduction System," in John Corcoran
(ed.), Ancient Logic and Its Modern Interpretations, Dordrecht, D. Reidel 1973.
Dummett, Michael, 1973. "The Justification of Deduction," Proceedings of the
British Academy 1973, 201-232.
Etchemendy, John 1990. The Concept of Logical Consequence, Cambridge, MA.,
Harvard University Press.
Gentzen, Gerhardt, 1935. "Untersuchungen iiber das logische Schliessen,"
Mathematische Zeitschrift 39, 176-210 and 405-431.
Green-Pedersen, Niels Jergen, 1980. "Two Early Anonymous Tracts on
Consequences," Cahiers de I'institut du moyen-dge grec et latin 35, 1-28.
Green-Pedersen, Niels J0rgen, 1983. "Early British Treatises on Consequences," in
P. Osmund Lewry (ed.), The Rise of British Logic, Acts of the Sixth European
Symposium on Medieval Logic and Semantics, (Papers in Mediaeval Studies
7), Toronto, Pontifical Institute of Mediaeval Studies, 285-307.
Green-Pedersen, Niels Jargen, 1984. The Tradition of the Topics in the Middle
Ages, Miinchen, Philosophia Verlag,
Haack, Susan, 1982. "The Justification of Deduction," Mind 95, 216-239.
Jackson, Frank, (ed.) 1991. Conditionals, Oxford, Oxford University Press 1991.
Jaskowski, Stanislaw, 1934. "On the Rules of Suppositions in Formal Logic,"
Studia logica 1, 5-32.
M E D I A E V A L PROOF T H E O R Y 1300-1350 145
King, Peter, 1985. Jean Buridan's Logic: The Treatise on Supposition and the
Treatise on Consequences, Dordrecht, D. Reidel.
Kneale, William, and Kneale, Martha, 1962. The Development of Logic, Oxford,
Oxford University Press.
Lear, Jonathan, 1980. Aristotle and Logical Theory, Cambrdige, Cambridge
University Press.
McCall, Storrs, 1966. "Connexive Implication," The Journal of Symbolic Logic
31, 415^33.
Moody, Ernest A., 1953. Truth and Consequence in Medieval Logic, Amsterdam,
North-Holland.
Nute, Donald, 1980. Topics in Conditional Logic, Dordrecht, D. Reidel.
Pinborg, Jan, 1972. Logik und Semanlik im Mittelaltex. Ein Uberblick, Stuttgart,
Fromann-Holzboog.
Pozzi, Lorenzo, 1978. Le consequentiae nella logica medievale, Padova, Liviana
editrice.
Prawitz, Dag, 1965. Natural Deduction. A Proof-Theoretical Study, Stockholm,
Almqvist & Wiksell.
Prior, Arthur N., 1953. "On Some Consequentiae in Walter Burley," New
Scholasticism 11, 433-446.
Prior, Arthur N., 1969. "The Possibly-True and the Possible," Mind 78, 481^192.
Schupp, Franz, 1988. Logical Problems of the Medieval Theory of Consequences,
(History of Logic 6), Napoli, Bibliopolis.
Shapiro, Stewart, 1998. "Logical Consequence: Models and Modality," in Mathias
Schirn (ed.), Philosophy of Mathematics Today, Oxford, Oxford University
Press, 131-156.
Smiley, Timothy, 1973. "What is a Syllogism?," The Journal of Philosophical
Logic 2, 136-154.
Smith, Robin, 1989. Aristotle: Prior Analytics, Indianapolis, Hackett Publishing
Company.
Stump, Eleonore, 1989. Dialectic and Its Place in the Development of Medieval
Logic, Ithaca, NY, Cornell University Press.
Tarski, Alfred, 1935. "Der Wahrheitsbegriff in den formalisierten Sprachen," Studia
philosophica 1, 261-405, (Derived from an earlier Polish paper published in
1933.)
Thorn, Paul, 1981. The Syllogism, Munchen, Philosophia Verlag.
Woods, Michael, 1997. Conditionals, (ed.) David Wiggins, with a commentary by
Dorothy Edgington, Oxford, Clarendon Press.
IVAN B O H
C O N S E Q U E N C E A N D R U L E S O F C O N S E Q U E N C E I N T H E
P O S T - O C K H A M P E R I O D
Late medieval logicians after 1350 continued to be concerned with a
cluster of topics connected with the idea of logical inference. Their
efforts revolved around the following topics: (a) the nature of
consequence in general and of sub-types of consequence; (b) the criteria
of valid or sound consequence; (c) the most general propositional rules
including those governing modal, epistemic, and obligational realms; (d)
the problem with the so-called Ex impossibili -rule: 'From any
impossible proposition any other proposition follows'.
The number of logicians and philosophers who were engaged in these
fields of investigation was quite large1
and we can only concentrate on a
few major philosophers who seem to be most interesting in developing
the cluster of themes just mentioned. We chose John Buridan, Ralph
Strode, Peter of Mantua, and Domingo de Soto. Although some symbolic
apparatus and some concepts of our times have been employed in our
analyses of medieval texts, this was done with the hope to clarify ideas
and not as a claim about "modernity" of the medieval logicians. Our
project is not so much one of reconstructing their view in our own terms
as it is one of understanding them in our own terms .
1. T H E N A T U R E OF C O N S E Q U E N C E IN G E N E R A L
Following the practice of the day John Buridan, writing in the midfourteenth
century, reminds the reader that in every scientific
investigation a preliminary nominal delineation of the subject matter is
necessary. He states that in logic the relevant parts of consequence, the
ideas of the 'antecedent' and the 'consequent' and the relationship
between the two will have to be elucidated. He proceeds to describe
consequence as
a hypothetical proposition, constituted of several propositions conjoined by the
particle 'if or the particle 'therefore' or one equivalent to it. The particles
mentioned signify that of propositions conjoined by them one follows from the
other. (Buridan 1976, 21.)
147
M. Yrjdnsuuri (ed.), Medieval Formal Logic 147-181.
© 2001 Kluwer Academic Publishers. Printed in the Netherlands.
148 IVAN B O H
Buridan observes at this point that some people hold that any such
hypothetical proposition joining several propositions by 'if or by
'therefore' is consequence as such (una consequentia) which can be
divided into true and false consequence. He also notes that some others
say that i f a consequence is false, it should not be called consequence, but
only i f it is true. He considers this to be a matter of terminology. He, in
any case, opts for the latter position:
In this tractate I want to understand (volo intelligere) by this term consequentia a
true consequence and by antecedent and consequent I want to understand
propositions of which one follows from another in a true or sound consequence.
(Buridan 1976, 21.)
Since he subscribes to the view that only true or sound consequences are
genuine, he examines a common charaterization of the components o f
consequence, i.e. the antecedent and the consequent, as well as of the
relation of consequential dependence.
Many say that of two propositions that one is antecedent to the other one which
cannot be true without the other one being true also; and that proposition is
consequent which cannot not-be-true while the other [the antecedent] is true.
(Buridan 1976, 21.)
Taking this characterization at its face value it would seem that it states
at least the sufficient condition for consequence: It is not possible that
p' is true and 'q' not true (definitionally) entails 'If p, then q':
Substituting F'q' for T'q' we get
-o(7V &F'q'^(p
We might even understand it as claiming that defining antecedent and
consequent amounts to defining consequence itself. In any case Buridan's
treatment of the first counterexample to the initial characterization
suggests that we are entitled to the statement of necessary condition for
a consequence:
( p — q)^-o(T'p' SiF'q').
The counterexample arises
because this is a sound consequence, 'Every man is running, therefore some man is
running, and it is possible for the first sentence to be true while the second one is
not. (Buridan 1976, 21.)
How do we know this is a sound consequence? Buridan does not say. He
seems to assume that we know what a consequence or inference in
general is when we encounter its instances in various kinds of cases. A n d
C O N S E Q U E N C E IN T H E P O S T - O C K H A M PERIOD 149
inasmuch as he equates genuine consequence with sound consequence, he
must also be assuming here that we know what a sound consequence is.3
As for this first counterexample, he thinks that it would be dissolved i f
we added the requirement that the antecedent and the consequent be
formed at the same time (Hits simul formatis). The possibility of 'Every
man is running' being true and 'Some man is running' being false is based
on the simple fact that there could be a time when 'Every S is P ' is
satisfied and 'Some S is P' not be satisfied simply on the ground that it
does not even exist. We again encounter the negative results: the
antecedent is true (or being the case) while the consequent is not true (or
not being the case).
But even the addition of the simul formatis requirement would not
save us from the next counterexample: This consequence is not sound,
'No proposition is negative, therefore no donkey is running'; and yet
according to the description mentioned it should be sound, since it is not
possible that the antecedent be true and the consequent false. To prove
the claim that the consequence is not sound Buridan invokes the
principle that ' i f a consequence is sound, then from the opposite of
consequent there follows the opposite of the antecedent':
(p -> q) irq
Applying it to the consequence in question, he confidently asserts that
'Some donkey is not running, therefore some proposition is negative' is
not a valid consequence. Again, he must be appealing to a general and
unproblematic notion of consequence somehow at our disposal. That the
consequence should be proclaimed valid according to the description of
consequence and its parts is obvious, since it is impossible for the
antecedent to be true, therefore it is impossible that it be true without
the other proposition being true also. The definition of consequence and
its parts has thus proved to be unsatisfactory even with additions of
various qualifying clauses.
Buridan next proposes a final definition of consequence and of its
parts:
That proposition is antecedent to another which is so related to it that it is
impossible howsoever the one signifies, to be the case that it is not howsoever the
other proposition signifies to be so, both being proposed at the same time.
(Buridan 1976, 32; King 1985, 182.)
It was assumed that this revised definition may stand the test of all kinds
of counterexamples that have been brought forth from various quarters.
150 IVAN B O H
2. B U R I D A N ' S DIVISION OF C O N S E Q U E N C E
Buridan divided consequence into formal and material. He defined formal
consequence as
one which is acceptable in any terms, keeping the same form; or, a consequence is
formal if it is such that every proposition of the form, if stated, would be a sound
consequence; for example, 'What is A is B, therefore what is B is A.' (Buridan
1976, 23.)
He defined material consequence as
one which does not hold in all terms, the form remaining the same; for example,
'A man is running, therefore an animal is running'; for it does not hold in these
terms, 'Ahorse walks, therefore wood walks.' (Buridan 1976, 23.)
In Buridan's view, no material consequence is evident in inferring the
consequent from the antecedent unless it is reduced to a formal
consequence by addition of some further premise which turns an
enthymematic structure into a full-fledged valid inference.
A subdivision of material consequence is that into simple and as-of-
now:
Some material consequences are called 'simple, because they are, simply speaking,
sound consequences, since it is not possible that the antecedent be true with the
consequent being false... (Buridan 1976, 23).
These consequences become evident in inferendo by addition of a
necessary premise; for example, ' A man is running, therefore an animal
is running' can be turned into a formal consequence by addition of the
necessary proposition (i.e. a proposition in necessary matter) ' A man is
an animal.' The simple consequence is still fully acceptable as it stands
since one could always remind oneself of the principle that necessary
premises may be omitted: that is, the claim expressed by
d(p & q) r) & nq) -> (p r)
is logically true.
The second kind of material consequences are called 'as-of-now'
consequences;
[these] are, simply speaking, not sound, because it is possible for the antecedent to
be true without the consequent being true; but they hold as-of-now, because it is
impossible, things being related as they are now, that the antecedent be true
without the consequent being true. (Buridan 1976, 23)
C O N S E Q U E N C E IN T H E P O S T - O C K H A M PERIOD 15 1
Take, for example, 'Socrates is running, therefore a student is running.'
This consequence can be reduced to a formal consequence by addition of
a true, but not necessary, premise, 'Socrates is a student.' While addition
of factually true premisses secures the reduction to formal inference, the
principle analogous to the one found in the realm of simple material
consequences which allowed the omission of necessary premisses is not
available for the realm of as-of-now consequences: there is no legitimate
principle which would allow omission of factually true premisses; that is,
assuming that V is a factually true statement, the claim expressed by
(((p&q)-> r)&T'q')-> (p - r)
is not logically true.
At this point we should raise a question about associating consequence
with conditional sentences. It was a prevalent view among medieval
logicians that all true conditionals are necessary, all false conditionals are
impossible and none are contingent. It seems also that truth of a
conditional depended, not on the truth-values of the antecedent and the
consequent, but on the soundness of the consequence corresponding to
the conditional, and not conversely. However, various kinds of
conditionals were recognized and, in particular, the illative and the
promisory. One would be inclined to think that only illational
conditionals, e.g., ' A horse is running; therefore an animal is running,'
could be held to be necessary, and be supported by the corresponding
sound simple consequences. But Buridan also recognized promisory
consequences. These are a subclass of as-of-now consequences. For
example, suppose Plato says to Socrates 'If you come to me, I shall give
you a horse;
this proposition might be a true and sound consequence, or it might be false and
thus not a consequence. For if the antecedent is impossible, namely that Socrates
cannot come to Plato, the consequence is simply true, because from the impossible
anything follows ... and if the antecedent is false, but not impossible, then the
consequent is sound as-of-now, because from the false anything follows in an as-ofnow
consequence ... (Buridan 1976, 24.)
Buridan can thus preserve his general thesis that corresponding to any
true conditional there is a sound consequence; but he cannot maintain
that any conditional, i f true at all, is necessary; only those which are
supported by sound simple material consequences (and, a fortiori, by
strictly formal consequences) are necessary. But those conditionals
which, such as the promisory ones, are supported by sound as-of-now
consequences, are, i f true, only contingently true.
152 IVAN B O H
3. B U R I D A N ' S E N C O U N T E R WITH T H E P A R A D O X I C A L R U L E S
OF S I M P L E A N D O F A S - O F - N O W CONSEQUENCES
Given this division of consequence and the definitions of the sub-types,
we can now appreciate the occurrence of two pairs of "conclusions"
which are not readily seen as obviously sound consequences but which are
implied by our definitions of consequence and its parts. The first pair
comes from the realm of simple material consequences: 'From any
impossible proposition any other proposition follows' and, 'A necessary
proposition follows from any other.' (Buridan 1976, 31.) Buridan sees
clearly that these "conclusions" are
based on our nominal definitions of 'antecedent' and of 'consequent.' For it is
impossible that some impossible proposition be true or that howsoever it signifies
be the case; therefore it is impossible that howsoever it signifies to be without
being the case howsoever any other proposition signifies. (Buridan 1976, p. 32.)
In symbols:
-•op —> ^o(p & —q)
or
-op -* (p -> q).
Further:
It is likewise impossible that it not be howsoever any necessary proposition
signifies; therefore it is impossible that howsoever it signifies to be does not obtain
regardless of howsoever the other proposition signifies to be. (Buridan 1976, 32.)
That is:
—o—q —» -•oQ? & —q)
or
-> (p -»• q).
Not only does Buridan recognize the validity of the paradoxes of simple
consequence; he also recognizes the parallel paradoxes of the as-of-now
consequence:
From any false proposition any other proposition follows as an as-of-now
consequence, and also, any true proposition follows from any other in an as-of-now
consequence. (Buridan 1976, 31.)
C O N S E Q U E N C E IN T H E P O S T - O C K H A M PERIOD 153
It would be too hasty to represent these as paradoxes of material
implication, i.e. as
-7? z> (p D q)
and
q => (p =>
for Buridan still thinks in terms of possibility, stating that the reason
why the two principles hold is
that it is impossible as-of-now that a proposition which is true be not true as things
are now related. Hence neither is it possible that it not be true with any other true
proposition obtaining. (Buridan 1976, 32.)
The discovery of these strange principles had already been made by
Abelard and the recognition of them as legitimate albeit somewhat
strange logical principles extended throughout the Middle Ages. Buridan
was one of the great defenders of these principles.
There appeared in the mid-fourteenth century a more general reaction
to the old definitions of 'consequence,' of 'sound consequence' etc.,
formulated in terms of truth values and alethic modalities, such as this:
' A consequence is sound iff it is not possible that the antecedent be true
and the consequent false.' Various counterexamples showed that it did
not succeed in stating either the necessary or the sufficient conditions of
validity. Even with adjustments designed to take care of all kinds of
difficulties, the results seemed unacceptable to many. Buridan's
replacement of the above definition with one which defines (sound)
consequence in terms of signification was not wholly successfull, either;
in particular, it still leaves us with the paradoxical Ex impossibili and Ex
/also rules which follow from the description of (sound) consequence and
its parts. Philosophers in the midfourteenth century and later, often
voiced serious misgivings about these rules and about the definitions on
which they ultimately rest. They were led to examine the concise proofs
which were offered for them, and one detects in their treatments
concerns similar to those found in our times by relevant logic.4
These
include discussions on the nature of disjunction, on the possible
restrictions on the use of disjunctive syllogism, on the principles of
simplification of conjunction and the subsequent principle of addition,
etc. We shall trace these developments in a later section, but we must
first observe the rise of new thinking on the nature of consequence,
especially among the English.
154 IVAN B O H
4. " E P I S T E M I C / P S Y C H O L O G I C A L " DEFINITIONS OF
CONSEQUENTIA
It has been noted and stressed by many medievalists that in the English
tradition the characterization of consequence, or at least of formal
consequence, often involved a reference to "epistemic" or "psychological"
modalities and other mental vocabulary such as understanding,
imagining, mental containment, and the like. E. A . Moody, for example,
writes:
Some of the English logicians, such as Ralph Strodus, introduced epistemic
considerations into their definition of formal consequence, saying that a
consequence is formal if the consequent is known through the antecedent—if it is
de intellectu antecedents. (Moody 1953, 71.)
He notices that Paul of Venice
also gives a psychological definition, saying that a valid formal consequence is one
whose antecedent 'cannot be imagined' to be true without the consequent being
true. (Moody 1953, 71.)
Moody further contends that in contrast to the English or Englishinspired
authors
this psychological emphasis is not found in most of the authors, such as Ockham,
Buridan, Albert of Saxony, or the Pseudo-Scotus. (Moody 1953, 71.)
Actually, it seems that Buridan could not be considered to be a clear-cut
case of logicians juxtaposed to the philosophers in the English tradition
with respect to the definition or characterization of consequence. For in
certain respects his views may be seen as structurally related to those of
Thomas Bradwardine (1295-1349) and Richard Kilvington
(1302/5-1361). In fact, it is the Parisian logician Buridan who is usually
associated with the definition of valid inference in terms of signification
rather than of truth (An inference is sound iff it is impossible for it to be
as signified by the antecedent without its being as signified by the
consequent), rather than Kilvington whose own definition became
common among English logicians. (Cf. Ashworth 1992, 521.)
In their joint article, "Logic in Medieval Oxford" E. J. Ashworth and
P. V . Spade present some specific illustrative material for the
'psychological' turn in the English tradition. They cite, for example,
Bradwardine's thesis that every proposition signifies or denotes as-ofnow
or simply whatever follows from it as-of-now or simply. (Ashworth
& Spade 1992, 38, n. 12.) The authors also suggest that Bradwardine
C O N S E Q U E N C E IN T H E P O S T - O C K H A M PERIOD 155
may have gone even further, holding not only that whatever is signified
by a name or a proposition follows from it, but also the converse, that
whatever follows from a proposition is signified by it. (Ashworth &
Spade 1992, 39.) They then suggest a link between the idea of
signification and the definition of consequence in mentalistic terms:
Since signification was always a psychological-causal notion in the middle ages,
Bradwardine's thesis had the effect of linking the logical relation of consequence to
psychological considerations. Perhaps it was at least in part because of this that
later English authors often defined a 'good and formal' consequence as one in
which the consequent was 'contained in the understanding' of the antecedent.
(Ashworth & Spade 1992, 38f.)
Ashworth and Spade also collected a number of examples of
'psychological* coloring of logic as it is found in descriptions and
definitions of consequence by various late medieval authors. Their
findings show how widely spread the new, 'epistemic' definition of
consequence and related concepts was; for their research shows that not
only the well-known figures, such as Ralph Strode (d. 1387), Richard
Billingham (Jl. ca. 1344-61), Peter of Mantua (d. 1399), Paul of Venice
(d. 1429), Paul of Pergula (d. 1451), Gaetanus of Thiene (1387),
Alexander Sermoneta (d. 1486), etc., but also the less known or even
anonymous ones adopted epistemically charged definitions in place of,
or in addition to, the old definitions couched in terms of truth-value and
alethic modes. The following definitions and names of their authors
(where available) are given (Ashworth and Spade 1992, 39, n. 15):
(a) Henry Hopton: "In every sound and formal consequence it is
so that the consequent is in the understanding of the
antecedent";
(b) Robert Fland (c. 1335-c. 1370): "To recognize when a
consequence is formal there are rules. The first one is this:
When the consequent is understood in the antecedent
formally";
(c) Richard Billingham(?) (Jl. mid-14th century): " A material
consequence is one in which the antecedent is an impossible
proposition or in which the consequent is necessary and is
not understood in the antecedent";
(d) Ralph Strode (d. 1387): " A consequence is called sound by
form when, i f the way in which facts are adequately signified
by the antecedent is understood, the way in which they are
adequately signified by the consequent is also understood; for
156 IVAN B O H
instance, i f anyone understands that you are a man, he will
understand also that you are an animal." (Seaton 1973);
(e) Richard Lavenham (d. 1390), Consequentie: " A formal
consequence obtains when the consequent is necessarily in the
understanding of the antecedent.
They add two definitions by unknown authors preserved in manuscript
form in Italian libraries (Ashworth and Spade 1992, 39, n. 15):
(f) "Material consequence is one whose antecedent is an
impossible proposition and the consequent is not understood
in it, or one whose consequent is necessary and is not
understood in the antecedent" (Consequentia materialis est
ubi antecedens est propositio impossibilis et consequens non
intelligitur in illud [sic] vel cuius consequens est necessarium
et non intelligitur in antecedente);
(g) " A n y consequence is sound and formal when the consequent
is formally understood in the antecedent" (Quelibet
consequentia est bona et formalis quando consequens
formaliter intelligitur in antecedente).
The last item on the list is the definition of consequence by William o f
Ware:
(h) "Every consequence is sound and formal in which the
consequent is formally understood in the antecedent, or the
significate of the consequent in the significate of the
antecedent."
To this we could add a definition from the Logica Oxoniensis:
(i) " A consequence is sound and formal when the consequent is
formally understood in the antecedent; for instance ' A man is
running, therefore an animal is running.'" Log. Oxon., s. x v ,
f. 4vb.)
The characterization 'psychological' may be misleading. It may suggest
that the acts of inferring a consequent from the antecedent was
interpreted as a factual matter of our associating images or ideas,
possibly governed by some laws of psychology. Or it may suggest that
the mind has a certain structure in virtue of which a normal reasoning
subject cannot but make inferences in certain ways which we judge
correct or sound. However, i f we look at the examples of definitions
given above, we will find that it is most likely the conceptual foundation
C O N S E Q U E N C E IN T H E P O S T - O C K H A M PERIOD 157
that is insisted upon and not the contingent acts of imagination, apprehension
and judgement which are, as such, not a matter of logic at all.
The characterization 'epistemic' is less misleading. It may be viewed
as pointing out the fact that (most) consequences (conditionals) were
interpreted as intentional, in the sense that the connection between the
antecedent and the consequent was not based on truth-values o f
components but on objective conceptual relationship apprehended by
the mind. This last clause should be taken seriously, for there seems to be
little doubt that the 'psychological' epistemological phase in Western
logic between around 1330 and 1550 paved the way for Cartesian
inference and the stress on mental certitude.5
Observing the above definitions, we must first note that all but (c) and
(f) purport to define soundness of formal consequence. It is in them that
conceptual involution of consequent in the antecedent is claimed to
hold. It is most likely that earlier in the middle ages, before the
transformation of topics and the absorption of them into systems o f
consequences, conceptual relations were taken care of by the principles
of topics, but without reference to mental acts or the epistemic subject.
During the sway of modal and truth-value systems of the late thirteenth
and the early fourteenth centuries topical principles were invoked to
'ground' inferences, and not only enthymems but sometimes even
(categorical) syllogisms which were normally considered as perfect. Some
definitions (g, h, i) call for the consequent to be formally understood in
the antecedent and (e) calls for the consequent to be understood
necessarily in the antecedent. It seems that this difference can be
disregarded as one of locution. However, the insistence on ''formally
understood' suggests that here there is a matter of the relationship o f
concepts and not a matter of associating images or contingent facts.
Only two definitions (d, h) make reference to significates o f
propositions or to "the way in which what is signified" is understood,
which seems to give importance to modalities and complexities o f
mental acts. Finally, two definitions (c, f) are not concerned with formal
but with material consequences. It is important to note the proviso, i.e.
that the consequent not be understood in the antecedent; for these
'epistemic' logicians it is not sufficient for a consequence to be material
that its antecedent be impossible or its consequent necessary. For
example, ' M a n is a stone,' is an impossible proposition, but the
consequence, 'Man is a stone, therefore man is lifeless' is, on this view,
not a material consequence because the consequent is understood in the
antecedent, and this suffices for its being a formal consequence.
158 IVAN B O H
One sense, then, in which consequences of this tradition are
"epistemic" is the presence of epistemic constitutive notes in the
characterization of consequence which we have just witnessed. The
second sense is the presence of the most general principles or rules for
the epistemic realm analogous to the most general principles for the
assertoric, alethic, and obligational realms. These are presented in the
next section.
5. STRODE'S RULES OF CONSEQUENCES
The sets of rules of consequences collected and organized by the early
fourteenth century authors such as Burley, Ockham, Buridan, Albert o f
Saxony and others invariably included not only rules governing assertoric
propositions but also rules for alethic modalities. The sense of quasideductive
organization of the rules, distinguishing the derived rules from
the principal ones, in their logical systems is impressive. In Strode's
Consequentie we encounter a set of rules of consequences which is not
only quantitatively much larger (24, as opposed to 10 in Burley) but also
quantitatively much richer in the sense that it includes rules which are
envisioned to serve as basic principles not only of assertoric and modal,
but also of epistemic and obligational realms.
Strode first defines consequence as "an inferring of a consequent from
the antecedent." It is not clear whether he means by 'inferring' (i) an act
of inferring or (ii) the conditions for inferring. He does allow that a
consequence may be sound (bona), or else unsound (mala); for a
consequent may be inferred properly (debite) or improperly (indebite).
Thus, Strode treats consequence as sequence of two (or more)
propositions, the antecedent and the consequent, joined with the
inferential sign 'therefore': p; therefore q; and since the pattern may or
may not hold (syntactically for formal consequences, semantically for
material consequences), we can envision particular or concrete
inferences to be instances of good or of bad inference patterns.
Of course we do not start with patterns; we may come to them after
applying the definition of sound consequence to any concrete case,
expressed in natural language.
A consequence is called sound when the facts cannot be as they are adequately
signified by the antecedent, without being as they are adequately signified by its
consequent. (Strode 1973, 137)
C O N S E Q U E N C E IN T H E P O S T - O C K H A M PERIOD 159
For example, ' Y o u are a man; therefore you are an animal,' meets the
conditions and is therefore a sound consequence. On the other hand,
'You are a man, therefore you sit' does not meet the conditions and is
therefore unsound. We should note that here the question is not of truthvalues
signifying propositions but of facts (or states of affairs) signified
by the antecedent and the consequent.
Next a division is made of sound consequences into two groups: those
which are sound by form and those which are sound materially only. T h e
definition of a consequence sound by form (bona de forma), as we saw
above, makes reference to "the way in which facts are signified is
understood." For example, i f anyone understands that you are a man, he
will also understand that you are an animal. It is said that in such a
consequence the consequent is derived from a formal understanding o f
the antecedent. A consequence sound by matter only (bona de materia
tanturn) is one in which the consequent is not derived from a formal
understanding of the antecedent, while, nevertheless, the conditions
required for sound consequence as described are preserved; for example,
'Man is a donkey, therefore a stick stands in the corner.' Strode adds the
reason why this is a consequence sound by matter only, viz. that
you can understand a man to be a donkey, even though you may not understand,
nor even think about, whether a stick stands in the corner.
The personal pronoun 'you' in the last sentence can of course be
replaced by the indefinite pronoun 'one.' However, the presence of an
epistemic subject cannot be eliminated. That same sentence may open
up a serious problem i f we interpret it simply as an empirical claim. For
even in the case of consequences which are supposed to be sound de
forma it may happen the consequent is not understood, or that we are
not thinking of it at all; e.g., 'This figure is Euclidean triangle, therefore
the sum of the interior angles of this figure equals 180 degrees.' Yet, i f
understanding or at least thinking about or considering the consequent in
relation to the antecedent is essential for a consequence to be de forma
and sound, this geometrical truth would not be sound de forma. In m y
opinion, Strode does not intend to make definitions or descriptions or
epistemic rules containing psychological or attitudinal elements as i f
they were of empirical-descriptive nature.
Strode, as well as other logicians of his tradition, encountered the Ex
impossibili and Necessarium ad quodlibet rules, but he argued that they
are merely material consequences. For they do not meet the requirement
that the consequent be understood in the antecedent. They are the only
160 IVAN B O H
rules of material consequences stated by Strode, and neither of them
appears among the 24 principal rules.
The set of general rules can conveniently be divided into several subgroups.
First, we have six rules of 'classical' propositional logic. Using
the arrow '—>' as contextually ambiguous sign of 'therefore' or *if,' we
might render these rules in a schematic way (we will identify the rules by
ordinal numbers on Strode's list; moreover, the italicized main
hypothesis holds for all the subsequent rules):
R l If a consequence is sound and formal and its antecedent is
true, then its consequent is also true.
(p-*q,pt q)
R2 If a consequent is false, then its antecedent is also false.
(p^q,-qV -/>)
R17 If something is antecedent to the antecedent, the same thing
is antecedent to the consequent.
(p -> q != (r -> p) -> (r-> q))
R18 If something follows from the consequent, the same thing
follows from the antecedent.
(P q*{q^ r)^> {p-> r))
R21 Arguing from the contradictory of the consequent to the
contradictory of the antecedent makes a sound inference.
(p-> qV^q^y)
R22 From the opposite of the consequent and one of its premises
there follows the opposite of the other premise.
((>&#)-> rt(-r&p) ~* -q and (p & q) -> rt=(-r& q) ->~p)
Secondly, Strode's list contains a sub-group of seven rules governing
alethic modal propositions:
R7 If the antecedent is possible, the consequent is also possible.
(P -> q r- op —• oq)
R8 If the consequent is impossible, the antecedent is also
impossible.
ip -> q ¥ ^oq -> ^op)
R9 If the antecedent is necessary, the consequent is necessary.
(p -> q ¥ Dp -> nq)
RIO If the consequent is contingent, then the antecedent is also
contingent or else impossible.
(p —> qY o~^q —> o-'p v "'Op)
C O N S E Q U E N C E IN T H E P O S T - O C K H A M PERIOD 161
Other rules involving aletic modal concepts of consistency and
repugnance are:
R19 If something is consistent with the antecedent, that same
thing is consistent with the consequent.
(p^ qV(rop)-^(roq))
R20 If something is repugnant to the consequent, that same thing
is repugnant to the antecedent.
(p -> q ¥ - ( r o q) -\r o p))
R24 If a consequence is sound, then the opposite of the
consequent is not consistent with the antecedent.
(p -> q N - 0 o ^q))
Thirdly, there is a group of three epistemic rules:
R13 If the antecedent is known, the consequent is also known.
(p q 1= K(a, p) -> K(a, q))
R14 If the consequent is doubtful, then the antecedent is also
doubtful or else known to be false.
(p -+ q {= D(a, q) -> (D(a, p) v K(a, -p))
R23 If the antecedent is understood by you, then the consequent is
also understood by you.
(p-+q, U(a, p) V U(a, q))
As is evident from Strode's elaboration on each rule, the application o f
the epistemic rules presupposes not only that 'p —» q' is sound but also
that the epistemic subject knows it to be such. The full statement of
R13, for example, would be
/? —> q, K(a, /? —• q)Y K(a, p) —• K(a, q)
However, in virtue of the generally accepted principle that nothing but
what is true (or what is the case) can be known {Nihil scitur nisi verum),
i.e. 'K(a, p) —> p,' we can omit 'p —• q' as unnecessary and accordingly
shorten the rule to
K(a, p-> q)Y K(a, p) -• K(a, q)
Strode points to another reason. In discussing his R14 he writes:
It should be noted that the phrase 'if it is known to be sound' is added to the rule
because it could be maintained that a consequentia is sound of which the antecedent
is known by you and the consequent is doubtful to you or believed to be
impossible. For instance suppose that you believed that Socrates does not exist,
and yet suppose that Socrates runs in front of you and that you see him. Then this
consequentia is sound, 'That man runs; therefore Socrates runs,' and the antecedent
162 IVAN B O H
of it is known by you, and the consequent is doubtful or believed to be impossible.
(Strode 1973, 160.)
Likewise for R14 as well as for R23. Examining the 'proofs' of these
rales we encounter the use of 'understanding' as crucial. In fact R23 itself
deals explicitly only with this concept. R23 is clarified as follows:
If the consequent is not understood by you, then neither is the consequence
understood by you. This consequence holds because understanding of the
composite presupposes understanding of the simple components ... and if a
consequence is not understood by you, then you do not know whether it is
sound—which is opposed to first part. (Strode 1973, 175f.)
Schematically:
1. K(a, p —> q) Assumption that you know that
the consequence is sound
2. ^U(a, q) Assumption that you do not
understand the consequent for
indirect proof
3. ^U(a, q) —> ^U(a, p —> q) from (2), failure to understand
simple components entails failure
to understand compounds
4. ^U(a, p^q) from (3), (2) by R l (modusponens)
5. -,
U(a,p^q)^^K(a,p^q) from (4), in virtue of the analytic
connection between understanding
and knowing: K(a, p) —> U(a, p) or
^U(a, p) ~* -K{a,p)
6. ^K{a, p^q) from (5) and (4) by R l
7. K(a, p^q) &. ^K(a, p—*q) (1), (6), conjunction—an explicit
contradiction
It should be remarked that Strode holds that 'K(a, pY entails l
U(a, /?)'
but not the converse: 'U(a, p)' does not entail 'K(a, p).'
The fourth major sub-group consists of four rules governing the realm
of logical obligationes. To represent these rules schematically we use
'N*(a, pY forl
p is to be denied by a,' 'D*(a, pY for 'p is to be doubted
by a,' and 'G*(a, pY for 'p is to be granted or conceded by a':
R5 If the antecedent is to be granted by someone, the consequent
is also to be granted by that same person
(K(a, p->q)t G*(a, p) - G*(a, q))
C O N S E Q U E N C E IN T H E P O S T - O C K H A M PERIOD 163
R6 If the consequent is to be denied, then its antecedent is to be
denied
(K(a, p-+ q)Y N*(a, q) -+ N*(a, p))
R15 If the antecedent is to be doubted by someone, the consequent
is not to be denied by the same person.
(K(a, p-^ q)V D*(a, p) ^ -N*(a, q))
R16 If the consequent is to be denied, then the antecedent is not
to be doubted.
(K(a, p ^ q)Y N*{a, q) ^D*(a, p))
Strode stresses the fact that the basic concepts involved in these
obligational rules are not descriptive but normative in character: 'to be
granted' (concedendum) means 'worthy to be granted,' 'to be denied'
(negandum) means 'worthy to be denied,' 'to be doubted' (dubitandum)
means 'worthy to be doubted,' and 'to have a distinction made'
(distinguendum) means 'to be such that it must have its senses
distinguished.' Again, his discussion of these rules brings out the necessity
to strengthen the basic assumption from ' i f a consequence is sound and
formal' to ' i f a consequence is sound and formal and known to be such.'
The general rules are not constitutive rules of the game of obligatio,
i.e. rules which express the nature of the game. They already presuppose
those rules that determine various systems of obligatio, such as positio,
depositio, etc. and they are not tied to the 'old response' or to the 'new
response.' The 'proofs' or dialectical defense offered for them, however,
do involve reference to rules such as
Everything possible put forward to you and known by you to be such is to be
admitted by you. (Pergula 1961, 102.)
That is:
(P(a, p) & K(a, p)) V G*(a. p)
This is in fact identical with one of the general duties [yet, understood as
prima facie rather than absolute duties] to follow truth. It seems very
appropriate to list here three sets of basic rules which determine the
moves of the participants (the respondent and the opponent) in an
obligational disputation. The sets are those of M . Yrjonsuuri (1993) and
the symbolic language that of Knuuttila & Yrjonsuuri (1988).
The general duties to follow truth (Boethius of Dacia):
164 IVAN B O H
ip) {(KrP & Rp) -> OCp)
(p) ((Krp & Rp) -* ONp)
(p) ((-Krp & -Krp & Rp) ODp)
Read T a : For any propositionp, i f it is known ('K') by the respondent /•
and it is put forward ('R'), it must be granted. W stands for denying and
'D' for doubt. 'O' ('ought') comes from deontic logic, (cf. Yrjonsuuri
1993, 23)
Rules of how the respondent should evaluate propositions put forward
to him (Boethius of Dacia):
Here 'Pp' stands for '/? is the positum.' Rj is thus to be read: For any
proposition p, i f it is the positum and it is put forward, it must be
granted. (Yrjonsuuri 1993, 34)
Rules for irrelevant sentences ('Ip') (Burley):
R 4 a {p) {{Ip & Krp & Rp) -+ OCp)
R 4 b (p)((IP & Krp &-Rp) -+ ONp)
R ^ (p)((Ip & -Krp & -Krp & Rp) ODp)
Now 'OD' stands for 'it must be doubted whether.' (Yrjonsuuri 1993, 52.)
Returning to the rules of consequences involving obligational
concepts, we should scrutinize Strode's proof of
R5 K(a, p->q)V G*(a, p) -> G*(a, q)
Strode writes:
If it [the rule] is not true, let the opposite be granted, namely, that the antecedent is
to be granted and the consequent not.
That is:
1. K(a,p^ q)
2. G*(a,p)
3. —G*(a, q) Assumption for Indirect Proof
Then, either the consequent is to-be-denied, to-be-doubted, or have a
distinction made:
4. N*(a, q) v D*(a, q) vX
R i
R3
ip) ((Pp & Rp) OCp)
(p)(q) ((Pp &(p-*q)&Rp)-> OCq)
(p)(q) ((Pp &(p^ -q)& Rp) ONq)
C O N S E Q U E N C E IN T H E P O S T - O C K H A M PERIOD 165
If it is to-be-denied, therefore it is either known to be false, or
conflicting
5. N*(a, q)~*{K(a, -q)v-(qoq))
If it is false, then the antecedent is false by R2. Strode applies 'K(a, p)—>
p' (truth-condition for knowing) to (1), to get
6. p ^ q
and to K(a, ->q) to get
7. -q
8. -77 from (6) and (7) by R2 (modus
tollens)
Strode goes on observing that
since the antecedent is to be granted, therefore the antecedent follows from
something rightly (debite) admitted. But whatever that admitted thing may be, the
consequent just as rightly follows from it. Therefore the consequent should be
granted for the same reason that the antecedent is. (Strode 1973, 147.)
Since it makes no sense to say that someone must concede or grant a
proposition unless that proposition is put forward and admitted, we
should take the next steps to be something like this:
9. G*(a, p) <-> A(a, p)
10. A(a, p) from (2) and (9) by R l for W
and given that everything that has been properly admitted is to be
granted, there is a sense in which 'G*(a, /?)' follows from 'A(a, p)S But
since p formally implies q, and the epistemic subject a knows that it does
so imply it, then 'A(a, p)' is sufficent for 'G*(a, q)' also. But inferring
'G*(a, q)' contradicts the assumption for indirect proof at step (3), and
thus the rule has been vindicated: The supposition that the rule is "false"
led to its own denial.
6. S O U N D C O N S E Q U E N C E A N D T H E RULES OF C O N S E Q U E N C E IN
PETER O F M A N T U A
In place of definition of 'consequence' Peter of Mantua provides a
description of it as a conditional (If p, then q) or a rational (p; therefore
q) proposition. We do get a definition of sound (bona) consequence as
166 IVAN B O H
a necessary relationship {habitudo) between two propositions, the contradictory of
the second of which is inconsistent with (non potest stare cum) the first one
without the new imposition." (Logica, hlvA).
He insists on the existence requirement and rejects the following
inference as erroneous: 'This consequence is sound, therefore the
contradictory of the consequent is repugnant to the antecedent*:
for perhaps the contradictory of the consequent does not exist at all, either because
this consequence has neither an antecedent nor a consequent; or perhaps it has an
antecedent, but does not have a consequent, or conversely. (Logica, hlvA.)
He does not stipulate some mysterious non-existing possible 'structures'
but rather points to linguistic capabilities; e.g., we can use the absolute
ablative form and interpret it consequentially: 'Socrate currente ipse
movetur' and understand it as 'Si Socrates currit, ipse movetur,' i.e. ' I f
Socrates is running, he is moving.' He is also concerned with subjunctive
conditionals such as ' I f Socrates were running, he would be moving,'
maintaining that as they stand, they are neither true nor false, since the
components are not propositions, i.e. things which are true or false,
things which could be incompatible, etc.
Peter also seems to depart from Strode in his apparent rejection o f
the role of 'understanding' in his definition of sound consequence which
he gives in terms of the impossibility of the conjunction 'p & -^q.' He
rejects this inference: 'This consequence is sound and formal, therefore,
if it is understood to be as is signified by the antecedent, it is understood
to be so as is signified by the consequent.' His argument for this rejection
is as follows:
For this consequence is sound and formal: 'A man is running, therefore something
capable of laughing is running'; but it is not the case that if you understand that a
man is running, you understand that something capable of laughing is running,
therefore, etc. (Logica, h2rA).
Yet, this is only a part of the story. While his characterizations o f
consequence and sound consequence, etc. are made without invoking
intellectio, one of the difficulties brought against his definition of formal
consequence suggests that the definition neglects the relevance between
the antecedent and the consequent. It makes the following inference
sound: ' A man is not a man, therefore a goat is disputing,' and
Yet there is no relation (habitudo) between the antecedent and the consequent. For
every relation which is a consequence is a following-upon (consecutio). But there is
here no following-upon of the second proposition from the other one, 'Man is not
C O N S E Q U E N C E IN T H E P O S T - O C K H A M PERIOD 167
man,' since it is composed of logically independent terms (terminis impertinentibus).
(Logica, h2rB.)
Unfortunately there is no specific reply to this difficulty, but only a
general one, i.e. that
formality of consequence depends on the mutual relevance of terms of the
consequent and the antecedent, and on propriety and order. (Logica, h2rB.)
Peter also adds that there are degrees of formality. Moreover, as we will
see shortly, Peter attaches the condition of 'understanding' of
'antecedent' and 'consequent' to all obligational and epistemic general
rules of consequences.
Formulating his principal rules of consequences, Peter tries to preempt
as many counter examples as possible by packing into the very
statements of rules several conditions. In Rule One, we find five
conditions demanded in all principal rules:
R l If a consequence is (a) sound (bona), (b) affirmative, (c)
determined by ' i f or 'therefore,' (d) having signification
through composition of its terms, (e) with its antecedent and
consequent fully expressed and neither of them having
multiple senses, and its antecedent is true, then its consequent
is also true.
In stating other rules, further conditions were added. Thus, all six
obligational rules of consequence (R3-R8) stipulate the epistemic
condition (f) that the epistemic subject know that the consequence is
formal. A further epistemic condition (g) was added to each of these
obligational rules: the respondent was supposed to know that from
something-to-be-granted only what is to-be-granted follows:
K(a,(G*(a, p) & -G*(a, q)) -(p -> q));
that from something true only what is true follows:
K(a,((T'p' 8cF'q')^^(p^ q)));
that from something to-be-denied only what is to-be-denied follows:
K(a, (N*(a, p) & -W*(a, q)) ~ip -> q)).
Still other conditions are placed specifically on the antecedents and on
consequents of obligational and also on the two epistemic rules (R9,
RIO). The four alethic modal rules (R11-R14) are stated elliptically, but
168 I V A N B O H
presumably require that the consequences governed by them be formal.
R15-R22 all belong to non-modal propositional logic.
The rules selected as the most general rules of consequence by Peter
of Mantua cover the same logical areas as those by Strode, but the way
he states them exhibits much more clearly the interconnections of the
epistemic and obligational areas with one another. Our schematic
representation above the inferential line includes the bare essential
conditions (a)-(e) plus the characteristic conditions imposed upon
consequents and antecedents in obligational and epistemic rules; it does
not include the variable condition (g) for the sake of simplicity.
R3: If a consequence is sound ... known to be formal, and the
antecedent is to-be-granted by a person, the consequent is
proposed, and in addition it is well known [to the same
person] that from what is to-be-granted nothing but what is
to-be-granted follows, then the consequent is also to-begranted.
(Logica, h2rA)
K(a, p -+ q), G*(a, p), P{a, q) Y G*{a, q)
It should be kept in mind that to-be-granted presupposes other acts. As
we saw, for Strode the act selected was the acceptance of a proposition
by the epistemic subject before he can grant it. (Of course, the
acceptance may itself presuppose the act of proposing by some other
agent, i.e. by the opponent). One cannot simply grant a proposition
anymore than one can accept an invitation unless it has been extended
to him. Signs of obligation are, as it were, speech-acts within a formal
disputation governed by rules.
Although the variable condition (g) is not listed, we should not
undermine its importance. We should at least be aware that our rules may
be stated loosely or incompletely. A s Peter points out:
It is invalid to argue: "This consequence is sound, known to be such, and its
antecedent is to-be-granted by a person and the consequent is understood, therefore
the consequent is to-be-granted.' For perhaps it is believed that the antecedent is
false or perhaps it is believed that from what is to-be-granted something which is
not to-be-granted follows. (Logica, h3rB.)
In the next five rules as well as in the two epistemic rules Peter employs
the concept of understanding {intelligere) as one of the multiple
conditions jointly sufficient for the consequents in question. In fact, he
makes the mental act of understanding a precondition for any response
in obligational disputation:
C O N S E Q U E N C E I N T H E P O S T - O C K H A M PERIOD 169
One ought not to respond to any proposition unless he first understood it.
(Logica, i4vb.)
Thus, a background principle,
-U(a, p) p)
(where 'R*(a, /?)' is short for 'a is obligated to respond to /?') is fully
endorsed and through it the connection between 'understanding* and
specific acts of responding is established:
R*(a, p) V G*(a, p) v N*(a, p) v D*(a, p) v X*(a, p)
Although Peter found no use for 'intellectum' in his definition o f
consequence, or for definition of sound consequence, he now does take
recourse to it, provided that 'understanding antecedent' or
'understanding consequent' means not merely understanding the
sentences but understanding them precisely as such, that is, as terms o f
the relation (habitudo) of consequence.
R4 If a consequence is sound ... known to be formal, and the
antecedent is to-be-granted [by you] and the consequent is
understood and proposed, and in addition it is well known [by
you] that from what is to-be-granted nothing but what is tobe-granted
follows, and that from truth falsehood does not
follow, then the consequent is neither to-be-doubted nor tobe-denied.
{Logica. h3rB.)
K(a,p -> q), G*(a>P), U{a, q), P(a, q) ¥ -IT{a, q) &-N*(a, q)
R5 If a consequence is sound ... known to be formal, and the
consequent is to-be-denied by someone, and the antecedent is
understood and proposed, and it is also known that from what
is to-be-denied only what is to-be-denied follows, then the
antecedent is, by the same person, to-be-denied.
(Logica, h3rB.)
K(a, p -+ q), N*(a, q), U(a, p), P(a, p) V N*(a, p)
R6 If a consequence is sound ... and known to be formal, and the
consequent is understood and proposed to someone, and it is
also well known that from truth falsehood does not follow,
and the consequent is to-be-denied, then the antecedent is
neither to-be-doubted nor to-be-granted by the same person.
(Logica, h3rB/h3vA.)
K(a,p -> q), U(a, q\ P(a, q), N*(a, q) f= -D*(a,p) & -G*(a,p)
170 IVAN B O H
R7 If a consequence is sound ... known to be formal, and the
antecedent is to-be-doubted and the consequent is understood
and proposed, and it is also known that from truth falsehood
does not follow, then the consequent is not to-be-denicd.
(Logica, h3rB/h3vA.)
K(a, p -+ q), D*(a, p), U(a, q), P(a, q) V -N*(a,q)
R8 If a consequence is sound ... and known to be formal, and the
consequent is to-be-doubted, and the antecedent is understood
and proposed, and it is also known that from truth falsehood
does not follow, then the antecedent is to-be-denied or to-bedoubted.
(Logica, h3rB/h3vA.)
K(a, p q), D*(a, q), U(a, p), P(a, p) V N*(a, p) v D*(a, p)
The two epistemic rules are:
R9 If there is a sound consequence ... known [by a person] to be
sound and its antecedent is known (scitum) and its consequent
understood (mentally grasped, intellectum) and it is not
repugnant (non repugnat) for the consequent to be known,
and it is well known [by the same person] that from truth
nothing but truth follows, and he sufficiently considers (pays
attention to, considerat) the consequent, then the consequent
also is known. (Logica, h3vB)
K(a, p -> q), K(a, p), U(a, q), C(a, q) V K(a, q)
RIO If a consequence is sound ... known [by you] to be sound, and
the consequent is understood and not known (nescitum), and
it is not repugnant for it to be known ... and you have
sufficiently considered the antecedent and the consequent,
then the antecedent is also not known. (Logica, h4rA.)
K(a, p -> q), U(a, q), -K(a, q), C(a, p), C(a, q) 1= ^K(a, p)
A n important condition added in the case of epistemic rules is that o f
consideratio of the antecedent and the consequent. One must sufficiently
consider these propositions to see how any response to them (granting,
denying, doubting, distinguishing senses) would fit into the context of an
obligational disputation, keeping in mind all the rules of the game.
7. O N L O G I C A L STATUS OF G E N E R A L R U L E S OF C O N S E Q U E N C E S
What is the logical status of the general rules of consequence? In raising
this question we should, of course, keep in mind that we are not dealing
C O N S E Q U E N C E IN T H E P O S T - O C K H A M PERIOD 1 71
here with formalized systems, and we might find even Moody's
observation rather anachronistic when he writes:
The rules of consequence are themselves formal, so that if they are expressed as
theorems or formulas of the object language, they constitute logically true sentences
of conditional form. (Moody 1953, 77.)
The idea that logical truth (tautologous or analytic character o f
sentences) is the foundation of medieval rules of consequences does not
have any support in historical texts. On the contrary, as we saw above,
medievals held that truth of a conditional was determined by the
soundness or validity of the corresponding consequence; i.e. T'P —> Q' i f
'P V Q' is sound. But soundness of a consequence depended (a) on the
impossibility of deriving a false consequent from a true antecedent
or/and (b) on the understanding of the consequent through the
antecedent. There is, however, a systematic correlation between (true,
necessarily true) conditionals and sound consequences which could be
invoked for various purposes. The rules themselves are such that if we
suppose that a given rule does not hold, we are led to the reassertion o f
the rule.
How did men come to possession of principles o f logic, such as rules
of consequences? Buridan says that others had treated the consequences
in a posteriori manner but that he was investigating the "causes" of the
validity of laws of inference. (Cf. Moody 1953, 8.) In fact, his Tractatus
de Consequentiis is a quasi-deductive system of rules with a clear
distinction between principal rules and those derived from them. His
system of principles of deduction, however, is restricted to assertoric
(propositional) and alethic modal areas.
A very interesting view about the place of the treatise entitled
Consequentie in the logical corpus and about the nature of its subjectmatter
is expressed by Alexander Sermoneta who in the "Prologue" o f
his commentary on Strode's Consequentie in the 15th century writes:
I say that this book [Consequentie] is the most universal part of the Prior
Analytics, or else is introductory to it; and therefore it should be placed
immediately after the De Interpretatione, and before the Topics, Sophistical
Refutations, and Posterior Analytics. This order is evident, because this book is
concerned with consequence as its subject, and this is more universal than any
special kind of argumentation, or than the syllogism, with which the Prior
Analytics is concerned. (Sermoneta 1493, "Prologue"; quoted by Moody 1953, 10)
Here the claim of universality of consequences covers the assertoric and
modal consequences, but it also extends to the obligational, epistemic
and other general rules included among the 24 rules found in Strode. The
172 IVAN B O H
obligational and epistemic rules are related to assertoric or bare
propositional logic in a way analogous to the way the alethic modal
principles are related to it: the latter are not simply a case of substitution
of modal sentences to the logic of propositions but are the most general
principles in the field of alethic modalities. Likewise, obligational
structures such as G*(a, p), K(a, p), etc. are not simply substitution
instances in theorems of propositional logic; rather they are primitive
elements entering the principal rules of their own respective fields. Even
though Strode and others often produced "proofs" for these principles,
these proofs are basically dialectical defenses, indirect proofs starting
with the assumption that a given rule does not hold. Such an assumption
should lead us, ideally, to its own denial, i f the rule was in fact a fully
stated correct rule. We might, for example, not be able to dialectically
defend the rale which did not take into account the fact that the
respondent knows that the consequence is sound. For the consequence
may in fact be sound and the respondent may have legitimately granted
the antecedent, but i f he does not know that the consequence is sound or
if he believes that it is not sound, he may not grant the consequent.
8. A S I X T E E N T H C E N T U R Y PERSPECTIVE O N C O N S E Q U E N C E :
D O M I N G O D E SOTO
In the second edition of his Summulae (Salamanca, 1554; Olms Repr.
1980) the respected Spanish philosopher Domingo de Soto presents his
basic system of consequences wholly within the chapters on hypothetical
proposition.
Soto says that
the name 'hypothetical' in its etymological sense applies only to conditional,
causal, and rational propositions which are consequentiae in which if the antecedent
is assumed, the consequent follows. (Summulae, 81rA)
He adds a little later that rational and causal propositions are subsumed
under conditionals (81rB). Conditional proposition is one in which two
categorical propositions are conjoined by the conjunction 'if,' although
sometimes what is conjoined is not propositions but propositional
complexes such as ' i f a man should dispute, he should act diligently,' i n
which it is not propositions but propositional complexes (complexa
propositionalia) which are conjoined (82rA). For truth of an affirmative
illative conditional such as 'If a man is, an animal is'
C O N S E Q U E N C E IN T H E P O S T - O C K H A M PERIOD 173
it is sufficient and necessary that it be a sound consequence, that is, that it not be
possible for the antecedent to be true and consequent false (82rB).
On the other hand, for truth of a promisory conditional (conditionalis
promissiva), it is not required that the consequence be sound; e.g., 'If you
serve me, I will reward you,' may be true even i f it is not a sound
consequence.
Soto sees no problem with the traditional view that every true
conditional is necessary and every false one impossible
because every consequence once it is sound is always sound, and once it is unsound
(mala), it is always unsound. (82rB.)
He concludes that
since it suffices and is required for truth of a conditional that it be a sound
consequence it follows that the true conditional be necessary and a false one
impossible. (82rB.)
The other two types of hypothetical propositions which he considered
to be consequences (81rA), the rational and the causal propositions, need
not, i f true, be necessary and, i f false, be impossible,
because for their truth it is not sufficient that they be sound consequences. For truth
of amxmative rational proposition it is sufficient and necessary (a) that it be a
sound consequence and (b) that its antecedent be true. And for truth of a causal
proposition it is sufficient and necessary (a) that it be a sound consequence and (b)
its antecedent be true and (c) that it be the cause of the consequent. (8hA.)
In terms of examples, the conditional 'If a man flies, he has wings,' is
true, but the rational proposition ' A man flies, therefore he has wings' is
false. Likewise, the rational proposition 'Man is capable of laughing,
therefore he is rational' is true, but the causal proposition, 'Because man
is capable of laughing, he is rational, is false; on the contrary the
converse is true, 'Because man is rational he is capable of laughing' is
true. From these stipulations Soto concludes that the definition of true
conditional' and of 'sound consequence' is the same. And, while true
rational and causal propositions are sound consequences, more is required
of them than being sound consequences.
Having defined 'true conditional' or 'sound consequence' Soto deduced
the principle that in every sound consequence the opposite of the
consequent is repugnant to the antecedent:
(p ~> q)^^(po
He seems to consider this as a principle in some sense preliminary to the
statement of the ten rules of sound consequence.
174 IVAN B O H
There are ten principal rules, mostly modal, in his system o f
consequences. (82vB / 83rA.) Three of those rules are of special interest
to us; the two "paradoxical" rules
*R7 -'Op 1= p —> q (with qualification)
*R8 nqY p —> q (with qualification)
and the rule "from first to last":
R9 p —> q V (q —> r) —> (p —> r)
Soto goes on to state:
There are other rules, namely, that if a consequence is sound, and its antecedent is
known, the consequent is also known; and if the consequent is not known
(nescitum), the antecedent is not known; and likewise other rules with 'it is
believed' (credilo), 'it is conjectured' (opinato), and 'it is doubted' (dubitato).
However, it seems that the reason why he did not list these with
principal rules is that "they belong to the Posterior Analytics" (83rB.)
The text just cited contains, in essence R9 and RIO of Peter of Mantua
and R13 of Strode; it also suggests that an equivalent of Strode's R14 as
well as other epistemic/doxastic rules could be formulated. In a chapter
on disjunction he recognizes fides (faith) as an epistemic mode as well.
In spirit of the new age of humanism Soto turns in the very next
section (still in Ch. 8) to "topical" arguments (loci) involving
conditional, rational, and causal propositions which he wanted to gather
from the last chapter of Prior Analytics.
The first locus is the formal inference modus ponens: He proclaims
q>ptq
to be aformal inference. Example is "suggesting" ancient sources: 'If the
sun shines, it is day, but the sun shines, therefore it is day' (83rB).
Whereas the first rule of consequence gives in metalinguistic terms an
explication of one immediate feature of consequence
R l From truth nothing but truth; i.e. if a consequence is sound
and the antecedent is true, the consequent is true. This rule is
from Aristotle's Topics 6, and it follows directly from the
definition of sound consequence. (82vA/B.)
The topical argument, on the other hand, offers, as it were, a commonly
used formal schema of reasoning: From a complete conditional, and
positing the antecedent, to positing the consequent, there is a formal
consequence.
C O N S E Q U E N C E IN T H E P O S T - O C K H A M PERIOD 175
The second locus is the formal consequence modus tollens:
P ~* o,-qY-p
The third locus,
P qtqv-p
states that "there is a sound formal consequence from a conditional to a
disjunction formed from the consequent and the contradictory of the
antecedent" The fourth locus,
P qV-q-^-p
endorses the Principle of Transposition. The fifth and final locus has to
do with rational and causal propositions. Adopting Angel d'Ors's
symbolic depiction and definition of rational and causal propositions
(D'Ors 1981, 245) as
P => <7=
d f (ip -> q) &p)
and
P >-> q =df ((P => q) & ip o q)) = ({{p -> q)&p)&(po q))
we can see that causal proposition entails rational and conditional
proposition, that rational proposition entails a conditional one, but that
the converse entailments do not hold.
Soto recognizes promisory conditionals as well. He states that they,
unlike the illative conditionals, are not, i f true, necessary, but contingent
(85vA). There are many promisory conditionals which only God knows
whether they are true or false (85vB). Suppose I made this promise to
you: If you win in the disputation, I will give you a book. Now,
if you will never win in the disputation, only God knows whether, if you had won,
I would have given you a book.
He rejects the view of those who hold that any promisory conditional
whose antecedent is impossible is true. He only admits that T f you came
first, I would have given you a book' could be true, but that it is not
alloted to us to know whether it is true or false (85vB). On the other
hand, he says that every promisory conditional whose consequent is
necessary is true (85vB), but does not explain why. Finally, contrary to
the ("moderni") summulists, 'for a conditional to be true' and 'to
obligate' are not the same; thus, if in an ugly business I make a promise,
T f you will give me 100 gold coins, I will kill your enemy,' it may be
that this is a true promise, yet it is nevertheless not obligatory. A n d
176 IVAN B O H
conversely it is possible that the promise be obligatory, although it is not
true; as when anyone does not observe what was promised in relation to
possessions. Indeed it happens that a conditional promise is obligatory
even i f the condition will never be fulfilled, e.g.:
if Peter promises Mary to take her for a wife on condition of something unsavory
which is held to be unacceptable, at least by the positive law. (85vB.)
9. QUESTIONING T H E V I A B I L I T Y OF T H E EX IMPOSSIBILI - R U L E
As indicated earlier, the later medieval philosophers expressed two major
concerns with the "classical" early fourteenth century theories o f
consequences. One was the definition of consequence and the stipulation
of conditions of its soundness—which was probably the main reason for
the rise of "epistemicized" definitions of consequence. The second
concern was with certain unconvincing rules, namely, ex impossibili {ex
/also) quodlibet sequitur and Necessarium (verum) sequitur ex quolibet
rules which turn up, apparently as "conclusions" from old ("preepistemic")
definitions of 'consequence.' Domingo de Soto posed the
problem as follows:
The conditional 'If God does not exist, then God exists' is a consequence in which
it is impossible to be so as is signified by the antecedent without being so as is
signified by the consequent. And yet it is not sound; and therefore the definition
does not hold {nihil valet). (85vB.)
The claim that the consequence is not sound is based on a principle from
Aristotle's second book of Prior Analytics to the effect that it is
impossible for one of the contradictories to infer the other.
Soto is aware that "all moderns" {omnes moderni) grant that the
strange consequence is sound without qualification because the line o f
reasoning from definition to
~^op —> ^o(p & q)
where q is any particular proposition you want is hard to resist. A s he
had proposed rule R7, he interpreted quodlibet ('anything') as
distributing "for genera of singulars," so that the meaning of R7 was that
a consequence could be sound ('/>—> <?') and the antecedent be
impossible (~*op) and the consequent be either impossible, contingent or
necessary. Soto holds that R7 and R8, i f understood as sound without
qualification {absolute) are both against reason and against the authority
of Aristotle:
C O N S E Q U E N C E IN T H E P O S T - O C K H A M PERIOD 177
Who in his sane mind would concede that if you were a stone, you would therefore
be God, since there is no relationship between you being a stone and you being
God. For nothing is understood to follow from another thing except what has some
relation to it, for example, of an effect to cause, of a genus to species, or something
like that. (83vB.)
Sometimes these "modern" summulists invoked a distinction, saying that
a sound consequence is of two sorts. One sort is sound in an intrinsic
manner (per modum intrinsecum); in it the consequent does have a
relationship to its antecedent. The other kind is sound in an extrinsic
manner in that its antecedent is impossible or its consequent is
necessary. But Soto finds the distinction a mere pronouncement without
reason or authority. (83vB.)
Soto's own position is that
no consequence is sound unless it holds in the intrinsic manner. Therefore it does
not follow that the necessary follows from anything; nor that from the impossible
anything follows (in their sense).
He adds:
I deny that this consequence holds: 'God does not exist, therefore God exists.' I
deny that the antecedent could not be true without the consequent; for indeed it
could be true without the consequent because 'could be' makes here a composite
sense, namely, that if truth of the antecedent is posited as possible or as
impossible, the truth of the consequent is not thereby posited. (83vB.)
If arguing from a semantically-determined impossible proposition, such
as ' M a n is a stone,' to any proposition whatever, is not sound, must we
at least admit that from a syntactically determined impossible
proposition, for example, from any pair of contradictories, any other
proposition follows? Soto scrutinizes the following example: 'Peter is
and Peter is not, therefore man is a stone or whatever else you wish.' He
takes the following steps:
1. p&^p
2. 1, Simplification of conjunction
3. P 1, Simplification of conjunction
4. pvq 3, Principle of Addition
5. q 4, 2, Disjunctive Syllogism
6. (p &^p)^ q 1-5, Conditional Proof
Actually, while justifications of the first five steps are fully recognized as
they stand by Soto's text, step 6 is seen by him as an application of the
principle of transitivity of entailment, expressed by his
178 IVAN B O H
R9 Whatever follows intrinsically from the consequent of a
sound consequence also follows from its antecedent.
(p q) 1= (q r) -> 0 -> r)
Applying this rule to justify step (6) we should think of the proof as
stating that if p = (1) entails q = ((2) & (3) & (4)), then i f ? = ((2) & (3)
&(4)) entails r = (5), then /? = (1) entails r = (5).
Soto admits that this argument has a sophistical appearance of a good
argument, but goes on to say:
In truth to me the argument does not prove its point. For in order that a
consequence from first to last (i.e. R9) hold, it is necessary that in the intermediate
consequences only that which is the consequent of the preceding consequence be
affirmed as antecedent of the next consequence in the chain." (84rB).
Soto does not think that this condition has been met in the above proof.
He argues:
In the consequence from a disjunction with denying one of its parts to positing the
other part, namely, 'Peter is or man is a stone and Peter is not, therefore man is a
stone,' this proposition, 'Peter is not' is assumed, although it was not a part of the
consequent of the preceding consequence, but had been the consequent of another
distinct and separate consequence; nor was it at any time granted as true. And yet
when it is assumed to negate one part of the disjunctive proposition, it is accepted
as true. Therefore, I believe that there is no impossible proposition from which
anything you wish would follow. (84rB.)
To unravel Soto's remarks about the misapplication of R9 to the effect
that the consequent of the earlier consequence and the antecedent of the
next consequence in line must be the same we reconstruct the proof in
another way:
1. (p&^p)-+-p
2. (p&-^p)-^p
3. p^(pvq)
4. ((pvq)&^p)^q
5. (p&^p)^q
The culprit designated by Soto is at step (4); whereas in the consequent
of the earlier consequence is
(pvq)
the antecedent of the next consequence in the chain is
(pv q) &^p
C O N S E Q U E N C E IN T H E P O S T - O C K H A M PERIOD 179
With /?, smuggled into step (4), the "middle term" of the presumed chain
of reasoning has thus been vitiated. This seems to be one point that Soto
is making. There is a second point of critique, viz. that *p' was a result
of a different, separate consequence and in any case was never asserted as
true. Thus, it is not eligible for a modus tollendo ponens disjunctive
reasoning to help obtain the remaining disjunct. Surprisingly, Soto does
not scrutinize here the fact that a proposition such as p & -7? itself is
merely supposed and could not be asserted as true.6
If the philosophers selected for this study are fairly representative as
to the conception of logical inference and related matters, it can be
concluded that in the two centuries after the death of Ockham "epistemically
/ psychologically" colored logic held its sway. Even Buridan was
already half-way into the new understanding of logic by moving from
talk in terms of truth of antecedents and consequents to the talk about
what is signified, or the manner of being signified, being the case or not
being the case. A more drastic move towards mentalistic characterization
of consequence and a development of epistemic/doxastic rules of consequence
was not far away and it made its mark on the history of logic.
The problems discussed by these late medieval authors are interesting
in themselves as well as historically. It will take many researchers to go
through details of extant literature before a viable comprehensive picture
of the period could be constructed.
Ohio State University
NOTES
1
Cf. Ashworth 1973; Ashworth and Spade 1992.
2
Cf. Normore 1990 for an examination of doxology in relation to history of
philosophy.
In a recent article, A . D'Ors argued that "it is not possible, within logic, to
establish an effective criterion which would permit the determination of the
soundness or unsoundness of a consequence, for adequate response to such a
question can be no other than logic in its entirety..." (D'Ors 1993, 196)
"[Moreover] ... a proprium' of soundness of consequence does not exist ... ; there
are at best 'necessary accidents,' properties which apply to all sound consequences
but not only to them. These properties, therefore cannot serve as a criterion for the
soundness of consequence, but at best, negatively, as a criterion of of
unsoundness." (Ibid.) The proposed criterion of soundness of consequence, "It is
impossible for the antecedent to be true and consequent false" is viewed by d'Ors as
a "necessary accident", and he considers it to be a mistake treating it as if it were
the proprium of sound consequence (Ibid., pp. 196f.)
180 IVAN B O H
4
Cf. Read 1993; D'Ors 1983, 1984, 1993.
s
Cf. Normore 1993 for a more comprehensive picture of the structural connections
between late medieval logic and Descartes.
6
Cf. D'Ors 1993, Read 1993 and other selections in Jacobi 1993.
REFERENCES
Ashworth, E. J., 1973. "The Theory of Consequence in the Late Fifteenth
Century," Noire Dame Journal of Formal Logic 14/3, 289-315.
Ashworth, E. J., 1979. "The Libelli Sophistarum and the Use of Medieval Logic
Texts at Oxford and Cambridge in the Early Sixteenth Century," Vivarium 17,
134-157.
Ashworth, E.J., 1985. "English Obligationes Texts after Roger Swyneshed: The
Tracts beginning l
Obligatio est quaedam ars,'" in O. Lewry, (ed.), The Rise of
British Logic, (Papers in Mediaeval Studies 7), Toronto, Pontifical Institute of
Mediaeval Studies, 309-333.
Ashworth, E. J., 1992. "New Light on Medieval Philosophy: The Sophismata of
Richard Kilvington," Dialogue 31,517-21.
Ashworth, E. J., and Spade, P. V., 1992. "Logic in Medieval Oxford," in
J. I. Catto and Ralph Evans, (eds.), The History of the University of Oxford,
vol. II: Late Medieval Oxford, Oxford, Clarendon Press, 35-64.
Boh, Ivan, 1993. Epistemic Logic in the Later Middle Ages, London/New York,
Routledge.
Broadie, Alexander, 1993. "Assent in Inference Theory," in Jacobi 1993, 637-652.
Buridan, John, 1976. Ioannis Buridan: Tractatus de Consequentiis, (ed.) Hubert
Hubien, Louvain, Publications Universitaries.
D'Ors, Angel, 1981. "En Torno a la Una Figura de Oposicion de Proposiciones
Hipoteticas Condicional y Consecuencia Intrinseca," in Logica, Epistemologia y
Teoria de la Ciencia, (Estudios de Educacion, no. 9), Madrid, Ministerio de
Educacion y Ciencia.
D'Ors, Angel, 1983. "Las Summulae de Domingo de Soto," Anuario Filosofico
16/1, 209-217.
D'Ors, Angel, 1993. "Ex impossibili Quodlibet Sequitur (John Buridan)," in
Jacobi 1993, 195-212.
D'Ors, Angel, 1984. "Los limites de la regla 'tollendo ponens': Juan Versor y
Lamberto del Monte," Anuario Filosofico 17/1, 9-26.
D'Ors, Angel, 1985. "La Doctrina de las Proposiciones Hipoteticas en la Logica de
Pedro de Castrovol," Antonianum 60, 120-159.
Jacobi, Klaus, (ed.) 1993. Argumentationstheorie. Scholastische Forschungen zu
den logischen und semantischen Regeln korrekten Folgerns, (Studien und Texte
zur Geisteggeschichte des Mittelatems, Bd. 38), Leiden / New York / Koln,
E. J. Brill.
King, Peter, 1985. Jean Buridan's Logic: The Treatise on Supposition and the
Treatise on Consequences, Dordrecht, D. Reidel.
C O N S E Q U E N C E IN T H E P O S T - O C K H A M PERIOD 181
Knuuttila, Simo, 1981. "The Emergence of Deontic Logic in the Fourteenth
Century," in R. Hilpinen (ed.), New Essays on Deontic Logic, Dordrecht,
Kluwer, 225-248.
Knuuttila, Simo, 1993. "Uber praktische Argumentation und Logik des Wollens
im Mittelalter," in Jacobi 1993, 607-619.
Knuuttila, S. and Yrjonsuuri, M . , 1988. "Norms and Action in Obligational
Disputations," in O. Pluta (ed.), Die Philosophic im 14. und 15. Jahrhundert,
(Bochumer Studien zur Philosophic 10), Amsterdam, Gruner, 191-202.
Maieru, Alfonso, 1983. English Logic in Italy in the 14th and 15th Centuries,
Atlantic Highland, Humanities Press.
Moody, Ernst A., 1953. Truth and Consequence in Mediaeval Logic, Amsterdam,
North-Holland.
Normore, Calvin, 1990. "Doxology and the History of Philosophy," Canadian
Journal of Philosophy, Supplementary Volume 16, 203-226.
Normore, Calvin, 1993. "The Necessity in Deduction: Cartesian Inference and its
Medieval Background," Synthese 96, 437—454.
Paul of Pergula, 1961. Logica and Tractatus de Sensu Composito et Diviso, (ed.)
M . A. Brown, St. Bonaventure, N.Y., The Franciscan Institute.
Peter of Mantua, 1492. Logica Petri Mantuani, Venice, Simon Berilaqua
Pluta, Olaf, (ed.) 1988. Die Philosophic im 14. und 15. Jahrhundert, (Bochumer
Studien zur Philosophie 10), Amsterdam, Gruner.
Pozzi, Lorenzo, 1978. Le Consequentiae nella Logica Medievale, Padova, Liviana
Editrice.
Read, Stephen, 1993. "Formal and Material Consequence, Disjunctive Syllogism
and Gamma," in Jacobi 1993, 233-259.
Seaton, Wallace K , 1973. An Edition and Translation of the "Tractatus de
Consequentiis" by Ralph Strode, FourteenthCentury Logician and Friend of
Geoffrey Chaucer (Ph. D. Dissertation, Univ. of California, Berkeley 1973),
Ann Arbor, Mich., University Microfilms.
Soto, Domingo de, 1554. Summulae (2nd.ed.), Salamanca, 1554. (Reprint:
Hildesheim, Georg Olms 1980).
Strode, Ralph, 1484, Consequentie Strodi, Venice.
S T E P H E N R E A D
S E L F - R E F E R E N C E A N D V A L I D I T Y R E V I S I T E D
1. A n argument is valid i f its conclusion follows from its premises; it is
invalid i f it is possible for its premises to be true while its conclusion is
false. How can we be certain of these claims?
(1) That the conclusion follows from the premises is a sufficient
condition of validity because an argument is a piece of discourse which
purports to deduce a conclusion from certain premises. Its success (its
validity) is measured by its succeeding in that derivation. O f course, this
condition is pretty vacuous until we give some account of the methods
of deduction: that is the central task of logic. But (1) is nonetheless
right.
(2) That the premises cannot be true while the conclusion is false is a
necessary condition of validity because it is essential to the notion o f
validity of an argument that it guarantee to take one from truth to truth.
It is for this reason that sustaining modus ponens is required of any
connective expressing entailment which corresponds to valid argument.
But might there not appear a gap between (1) and (2)? Perhaps to
give different necessary and sufficient conditions for validity will permit
an argument which can neither be shown to be valid, for its conclusion
cannot be deduced from its premises, nor shown to be invalid, for its
conclusion could not be false while its premises were true. A natural way
to prevent this situation arising is to take just one condition to be both
necessary and sufficient for validity.
One such account of validity takes (2) to express both a necessary and
a sufficient condition. I shall call it 'the Classical Account of Validity.' It
states that an argument is valid i f and only i f it is impossible for its
premises to be true while its conclusion is false.
What is distinctive of the classical account is that it takes the
impossibility of true premises and a false conclusion to be sufficient for
validity. But can this be accepted? The paradoxes of strict implication
are often put forward as a counterexample to this claim. But perhaps
they just show that any argument whose premises cannot be true
together or whose conclusion must be true is, often despite appearances,
valid. To support the objection we need to produce an argument which is
183
M. Yrjonsuuri (ed.), Medieval Formal Logic 183-196.
© 2001 Kluwer Academic Publishers. Printed in the Netherlands.
184 S T E P H E N R E A D
clearly invalid and yet has, for example, a necessarily true conclusion.
For if its conclusion must be true, then it would indeed be impossible for
its conclusion to be false jointly with the truth of its premises. So by the
classical account a clearly invalid argument would be valid.
2. Such an argument was put forward by Pseudo-Scotus.1
The epithet
'Pseudo-Scotus' derives from the fact that the treatise by which we know
the author, though not by Scotus, was included in the collected works o f
John Duns Scotus in the seventeenth century. This treatise is a
commentary on the Prior Analytics of Aristotle. The collected works
also contain a commentary on Aristotle's Posterior Analytics. Neither
commentary is by Scotus himself. So both are attributed to 'Pseudo-
Scotus.'
The following argument comes from the commentary on the Prior
Analytics. It dates after 1331 (Scotus died in 1308), since it discusses the
notion of the complexly signifiable {complexe significabile: PseudoScotus
1891-5, question 8, 98b—101b), a notion introduced in that year
by Adam Wodeham (see Gal 1977, 70-71) in his Sentences
commentary. Bendiek (1952, 206) used this fact to argue for a date after
1344, since at the time he was writing, it was thought that the notion o f
the complexly signifiable was due to Gregory of Rimini. Gal (1977), in
editing a question from Wodeham, showed that he had anticipated
Gregory by some years. Nonetheless, it may well be that our author took
the notion from Gregory, and that the correct date is indeed in the
decade or so after 1344. Boh (1982) dates it around 1350, but gives no
reason.
In an Oxford manuscript, the commentary on the Posterior Analytics
is attributed to John of St Germain of Cornwall. Emden, in his list o f
Oxford scholars, identifies John of St Germain as studying at Oxford
from 1298-1302 and teaching at Paris from 1310-15 (Emden 1959,
col. 1626). Some modern commentators have chosen to cite the author
of the questions on the Prior Analytics as John of Cornwall. However,
there is no reason to suppose the two treatises have the same author.
Indeed, the late date of the questions on the Prior Analytics shows that
the work cannot be by the John of St Germain listed by Emden, who also
reveals no connection with Cornwall. Perhaps the Cornish St Germain is
a scholar of the next generation; or our Pseudo-Scotus is not him at all.
We do not know; we must continue, therefore, to call its author 'Pseudo-
Scotus.'
S E L F - R E F E R E N C E A N D V A L I D I T Y REVISITED 185
3. Let A be the argument:
God exists
Hence this argument is invalid
Pseudo-Scotus took the premise to be necessarily true. (Atheists may
substitute '1 = 1.') We can then reason as follows.
If the argument A is valid, A has a true premise and a false conclusion.
But every argument with a true premise and a false conclusion is
undoubtedly invalid. (This follows from the necessity of the condition
offered earlier. What is under attack is its sufficiency.) So A is invalid.
That is, i f A is valid, then it is invalid.
So A is invalid, by reductio ad absurdum.
Our only assumption (if we may call it that) in demonstrating the
invalidity of A was that God exists (or that 1 = 1). And that is
necessarily true. By a plausible thesis concerning modal terms, what is
deduced from a necessarily true proposition is itself necessarily true.4
So it is necessarily true that A is invalid.
But that shows that A has a necessarily true conclusion. If the classical
account of validity were correct, and the necessary truth of the
conclusion of an argument were sufficient for the argument's validity, it
would follow that A was valid.
Hence, if the classical account is correct, A is both valid and invalid.
The classical account leads to contradiction, and so must be wrong. A is
an argument which is clearly invalid, yet which the classical account
maintains is valid.
So the classical account is incorrect.
4. One may, however, have reservations about the self-reference present
in argument A . On taking the classical account of validity, we find that
A leads to contradiction. But certain sentences exhibiting self-reference
lead to contradiction anyway. Various ways of dealing with those
paradoxes were suggested both in the Middle Ages and in more recent
times.
Two kinds of solution popular in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries
were cassatio and restrictio. The idea of the former was that such selfreferential
utterances as the Liar paradox, 'What I am saying is false,'
simply say nothing at all; the latter went further, in claiming that
strictly speaking, self-reference is impossible, and that i f such an
utterance as the Liar means anything at all, it is that, e.g., one's previous
utterance was false.5
There is considerable similarity between both these
186 S T E P H E N R E A D
ideas and Tarski's familiar claim that semantic closure (a language's
containing its own truth-predicate) leads to incoherence, and his
recommendation of a hierarchy of object language and metalanguage.6
Cassatio and restrictio became less popular in the fourteenth century,
and had few proponents in the later fourteenth, fifteenth and sixteenth
centuries. A n extremely influential alternative theory seems first to
have been proposed by Thomas Bradwardine in his treatise on insolubles
{insolubilia—problems which are not strictly insoluble but only "solved
with difficulty," as William Ockham put it). Bradwardine's treatise was
written in the 1320s, many years before he became Archbishop o f
Canterbury. Forty years later, Ralph Strode called Bradwardine that
"prince of modern natural philosophers who first came upon something
of value concerning insolubles." This idea was that every insoluble not
only has a primary standard meaning, but also means that it itself is true.
Bradwardine proved this by an extended argument hinging on the
postulate that every proposition includes in its meaning whatever
logically follows from it (see Roure 1970, 297).
Albert of Saxony and others went further. Every proposition, they
said, signifies itself to be true. Once again, this was proved from a set of
postulates analysing what exactly it is to be true (Albert of Saxony 1988,
339-40). John Buridan, Albert's teacher at Paris in the 1340s and '50s,
whose development of these ideas has been most frequently commented
on and analysed (e.g., Prior 1962, Scott 1966, Hughes 1982), and who at
one time adopted Albert's expressed view, qualified this claim. We can't
say that every proposition means that it itself is true, for then we would
either have a use/mention confusion (not every proposition refers to
itself) or at least a reference to the proposition's own truth, and so no
adequate account of falsehood, for there would be nothing to refer to
when it was false (Hughes 1982, §7.7.1 and commentary). Buridan
preferred to say that every proposition "virtually implies" its own truth.
Whatever the exact detail of Bradwardine's and his followers' theses
about the meaning or implication of each insoluble, they agree on this:
that each insoluble is false. For it means, or implies, something which is
not the case, namely, that it itself is true. It can't be, for it also
(primarily) means that it's not true. Whatever entails a contradiction is
false, and the insolubles entail the contradiction that they are both true
and false. So they are all false.
5. It is time to return to argument A . If A should be found to lead to
contradiction, independently of acceptance of the classical account o f
S E L F - R E F E R E N C E A N D V A L I D I T Y REVISITED 187
validity, then whatever solution one takes to the paradoxes of selfreference
will undercut the demonstration in §3 that the Classical
Account of Validity is mistaken. Whatever solution removes the
contradiction resulting from A independently of the classical account
will certainly remove that resulting from it in conjunction with that
account.
So does A result in contradiction independently of the classical
account?
Let B be the argument:
This argument is valid
Hence this argument is invalid.
If the argument B is valid, then it has a true premise and a false
conclusion. Therefore B is invalid. That is, i f B is valid, then it is invalid.
So B is invalid, by reductio.
But what have we shown? Look again at that sentence: ' i f B is valid,
then it is invalid.' We have deduced the invalidity of B from the premise
that B is valid. That is precisely what B says we can do.
So B is valid.
And that is a contradiction. B is both valid and invalid. A n y solution
to the paradoxes of self-reference must deal with argument B as well.
When we deduced a contradiction from A in § 3 , we had made an
assumption, namely that the classical account of validity was correct.
Hence we were able to evade the contradiction (we thought) by denying
the correctness of the classical account. With B , however, we have
deduced a contradiction—by unquestionable facts about validity: 1) that
any argument whose conclusion follows from its premises is valid; and 2)
that any argument whose premises might be true and conclusion false is
invalid. If the establishment above of the validity of B is to be faulted
that can only be done by faulting some step in the derivation of B's
invalidity from the hypothesis of its validity. If that deduction is sound,
as I claim it is, then it is immediate, from 1) that B is valid.
6. We can now diagnose the fault in Pseudo-Scotus' example. The
classical account of validity is not needed to establish that argument A is
valid, and so to derive a contradiction from it.7
In establishing that A
was valid, Pseudo-Scotus reasoned as follows.
We take as our premise that God exists. Then suppose A is valid. In
that case, A has a true premise and a false conclusion. Therefore it is
invalid. That is, given that God exists, then if A is valid, it is invalid.
188 S T E P H E N R E A D
So, i f God exists, A is invalid.
(From this, by modus ponens for 'if,' Pseudo-Scotus deduced that A
was indeed invalid, since God exists.)
What we have done is precisely to deduce A ' s conclusion (that A is
invalid) from its premise (that God exists).
So A is valid.
Regardless of our acceptance of the classical account of validity, A is
both valid and invalid. Nor does A ' s .premise need to be necessarily true.
If A ' s premise is true, then i f A is valid, it is invalid. Hence, by reductio
ad absurdum, if A ' s premise is true, A is invalid. Since we have deduced
A's conclusion from its premise, A is valid. And since its premise is true,
A is invalid.
7, The paradoxical nature of argument A was in fact recognised in the
medieval period by Albert of Saxony (1988, 360-1), also writing in
about 1350. Clearly A is invalid, Albert says, by an argument similar to
that we gave in §3. But then, suppose A is invalid. It follows that its
consequent is true. So the antecedent cannot be true without the
consequent's also being true. Hence (see below) A is valid, i.e. i f we
suppose A is invalid, it follows that it's valid. So it's valid.
Albert has in fact used the Classical Account of Validity here—which,
we have just seen, he didn't need to do. He wrote: " i f argument A is not
valid, it is possible for [its antecedent] to be true while [its consequent] is
false" (ibid., p. 361). That is, condition (2) in §1 is taken to be sufficient
for validity (because necessary for invalidity) in the penultimate step
(marked 'see below'), where he concludes that A is valid on hypothesis
that it is invalid. Nonetheless, Albert does not proceed to reject (or
revise) the Classical Account, as did Pseudo-Scotus. Instead, he applies
his analysis of insolubles, rejecting the move from the supposition that
A is invalid to the conclusion that the consequent is true. For supposing
the consequent is true, it follows that A is valid, and so it means that A is
valid (as well as meaning, primarily, that A is invalid). But we have
supposed A wasn't valid, so "things are not however [the consequent]
signifies them to be." So A is invalid, but the consequent is not true.
Q
One may not agree with Albert's solution. It appears to achieve
consistency at the expense of preventing us saying that what is the case
is true. What is important is the recognition of the connection between
A and the other insolubles such as the Liar. Indeed, Albert considers
some propositional variants of the paradox. The propositional form o f
A is the conditional a:
S E L F - R E F E R E N C E A N D V A L I D I T Y REVISITED 189
If God exists then this (conditional) sentence is false.9
If a is true, then it is a true conditional with true antecedent, so its
consequent is true, and so i f a is true, it's false. So a is false. Albert
proceeds to show that the supposition that a is false leads to
contradiction, relying on the principle that a conditional is true only if it
is impossible for the antecedent to be true and the consequent false—the
analogue for conditionals of the Classical Account of Validity. But we
can simplify his argument as we did in §6. For in showing that a was
false, we relied on the fact that 'God exists' was true. That is, what we
showed was that i f God exists then a is false. But that is what a says. So
a is true (as well as false).
A further variation, which both Albert (1988, 357-9) and Buridan
(Hughes, 60-1) consider, gives the paradox a conjunctive or disjunctive
form. Let % be the conjunction:
God exists and this (conjunctive) sentence is false
and 5 the disjunction:
God does not exist or this (disjunctive) sentence is false.1 0
Suppose 8 is true. Then either God does not exist or 8 is false. But God
does exist. So 6 is false, i.e. i f 5 is true it's false. So 8 is false. Hence
either God does not exist or 8 is false, which is what 8 says. So 8 is true
too. A similar argument shows that % is also paradoxical.
Albert and Buridan both use their theories of insolubles to diagnose the
error, claiming that a, % and 8 are all false. Paradox is rife here, and
Pseudo-Scotus and others (e.g., Priest and Routley 1982) should hesitate
to use argument A to question any account of validity. If the Classical
Account is wrong, a different proof of that fact must be found.
8. A n argument which could (superficially) be called the contrapositive
of A was considered by a number of fifteenth and sixteenth century
authors.1 1
Let C be the argument:
This argument is valid
Hence God does not exist.
(C is not strictly the contrapositive of A since 'this argument' now
refers to C, not to A.)
If C is valid, then since God exists, C has a true premise and a false
conclusion. Therefore C is invalid. That is, i f C is valid, then C is invalid.
So C is invalid, by reductio.
190 STEPHEN R E A D
On the other hand, i f C is valid, then its conclusion can be deduced
from its premise, and its premise is true. So its conclusion is true. That
is, i f C is valid, then God does not exist.
So C is valid, since its conclusion has been deduced from its premise.
Pseudo-Scotus' own solution to his objection (argument A ) to the
classical account of validity was to add to that account an exceptive
clause. He said that an argument was valid i f and only i f it is impossible
for the premises to be true and the conclusion false together, except
when the conclusion explicitly denies the connecting particle (here
'hence'), that is, when it denies that the argument is valid. Argument C
serves to show this clause insufficient. Pseudo-Scotus* revision covers
argument A , but not its 'contrapositive,' C.
On the other hand, of course, neither A nor C in fact need be allowed
for by an account of validity. They will already have been excluded from
consideration by the account of self-referential paradox.
9. Argument C corresponds to Curry's paradox. For C is the inferential
I 2
version of a conditional, y:
If this (conditional) sentence is true, then God does not exist.
(Of course, the reference changes, from arguments to conditionals
—sentences—and truth of conditionals replaces validity of arguments.)
Sentences of the form ' i f this sentence is true, then p' can be used to
show that any sentence is true.
For suppose yis true. Then i f its antecedent is true, so is its
consequent, and its antecedent is true. So its consequent is true, that is,
God does not exist. That is, if y is true, then God does not exist. But that
is what y says. So y is true.
Hence, i f its antecedent is true, so is its consequent, and its antecedent
is true. So its consequent is true, that is, God does not exist.
We can use C in the same way to establish its conclusion, (y and C are,
we might say, the ultimate ontological argument.) Indeed, we can use A
to show, to Pseudo-Scotus' dismay, that its premise is false. For A is
valid. So its conclusion is false. So its premise must be false too!
And in the manner in which we showed that C is both valid and invalid
we can show that y is both true and false. We have already seen the
conditional form, a of A . There will also be a conditional form, p of B .
Indeed we can treat B (and A ) as we did C: i f B is valid, then its
conclusion can be deduced from its premise and its premise is true.
S E L F - R E F E R E N C E A N D V A L I D I T Y REVISITED 191
Therefore its conclusion, that is, ' B is invalid,' is true, and so B is
invalid. (I'll remark on this final step in §11.) That is, i f B is valid, then
it is invalid.
That conditional contains all we need to conclude both that B is valid,
since we have deduced B ' s conclusion from its premise, and that B is
invalid, by reductio.
10. The conditional form P of the argument B lies behind Rosser's proof
of Godel's theorem.1 3
For (3 is:
If this sentence is true, then this sentence is false.
Suppose P is true. Then it is false. That is, i f (3 is true, then it is false. So
p is true, since that is what J3 says, and P is false, by reductio.
Godel used the Liar paradox, 'This sentence is false,' to construct an
undecidable sentence G of arithmetic. G says informally: G is not
provable. Neither G nor its negation is provable in arithmetic. However,
the demonstration that ~<j is not provable requires the assumption that
arithmetic is co-consistent.14
To reduce this assumption to the assumption only o f simple
consistency, Rosser considered instead of G a sentence H which says
informally: i f H is provable, then there is a simpler proof of - H . (What I
am here calling 'simpler' was defined precisely in terms of one proofs
having a smaller Godel number than the other.) It was the condition that
the proof o f - - H be simpler than that of H which allowed the assumption
of co-consistency to be dropped.
Without this restriction on size of proof, we obtain a sentence J which
says informally: i f J is provable, then - J is provable. J corresponds to p
as G corresponds to the Liar sentence. It is straightforward to show that
both the assumption that J is provable and the assumption that -"J is
provable lead to contradiction, given the co-consistency of arithmetic.
Hence, following Godel, we can conclude that J is an undecidable formula.
That is, neither J nor its negation is provable.
If the demonstration that i f J is provable then -"J is provable were
formalizable in arithmetic, it would constitute a proof of J, by the
deduction theorem, and a proof o f - J , by reductio, just as we showed B to
be both valid and invalid. But although we have that if hj then Y- ,
J , we do
not have J I- - J ; i f arithmetic is consistent. On that assumption, the
derivation of- ,
J from J cannot be performed in arithmetic.
192 S T E P H E N R E A D
11. Does Rosser's use of H rather than J have any significance for us? I
think not. From the assumption that J is provable, it follows that '-\J is
provable' is provable. The problem is to extract a proof of -"J from this.
Lob (1955, 116) showed that (what informally expresses) ' i f S is
provable then S' is provable only i f S is provable. To obtain the proof of
- J we need to assume co-consistency, to ensure that the Godel number
which < _ ,
J is provable' asserts to exist is in fact one of 0,1,... ,
In the case of H however, we are given a bound on the Godel number
which indexes the proof of ~>H. This yields a proof of -"H with the
assumption only of simple consistency. But the bound on size of proof
has no analogue in the natural language context of B and (3. What might
have significance is the analogue of Lob's result, namely that ' i f S is true
then S' should be true only when S is true. Recall that in §9 we inferred
immediately from the fact that B's conclusion, that is, ' B is invalid,' was
true, that B was invalid. (We used ' i f S is true then S' when dealing with
B in §5 also, but there it took the form of concluding that ' B is invalid'
was false from the hypothesis that B was valid, and so was not invalid.)
We did this at precisely the point where in the corresponding
arithmetical proof we need to use co-consistency. We need to make the
move in order to show that B is valid (respectively, that if J is provable
then - J is provable). But we would be allowed to make it only i f B was
valid (J was provable). So we would never get started.
Suppose we try to treat truth in the natural language examples as we
treat provability in arithmetic. Immediately we need to deny the law of
excluded middle. Arithmetic is consistent only i f it is not negationcomplete.
Godel showed that some sentences of (a consistent) arithmetic
are neither provable nor refutable. But such a lead from arithmetic would
not end with claiming certain self-referential sentences to be neither true
nor false. We would have also to reject that half of the truth-equivalence
corresponding to Lob's result, permitting the inference of S from 'S is
true.' With the Liar sentence we can avoid the establishment by
Dilemma that L is both true and false by denying that it is either. With
the Curry paradox and arguments A , B and C, excluded middle is not
used. It appears that one can prove that, for example, y is true, or B is
valid. To refuse to move from, say, ' " B is invalid' is true" to " B is
invalid" would block the demonstrations both that B is valid and that it is
invalid. Yet to do this we have now to deny not excluded middle but ' i f S
is true then S.' Otherwise any claim that B was neither valid nor invalid
would not only be totally unsupported but contrary to fact.
SELF-REFERENCE A N D V A L I D I T Y REVISITED 193
The proposal is the converse of the solution proposed by Bradwardine
and others. They rejected the move from S to 'S is true' (at least for
insolubles, and for all propositions for Albert and Buridan). Their
proposal promises to solve the paradoxes, but at the price o f
compromising one's theory of truth altogether.1 5
The present proposal
suggests instead that we block the move from the denial of S to the
denial that S is true, at least when S is not true. Again, the paradoxes
may be blocked, but at the price of being unable to deny what is plainly
not true.
So to deny the truth-equivalence is, for me, too high a price to pay. It
is constitutive of the notion of truth that i f S is true then things are as S
states them to be. (Of course, it is constitutive of the notion of proof
that if S is provable then there is a proof of S. Lob's result shows not
that the arithmetical predicate which informally expresses 'provable'
does not have this property, but that only for provable sentences can
one show in arithmetic that it has the property.).
Formal arithmetic is (we hope) consistent. That is why we can
conclude that it is negation-incomplete. But natural language is at first
blush inconsistent. Its deductive power seems unlimited; we cannot easily
constrain it in the way we can choose to constrain formal theories. (5 is
both true and false and B is both valid and invalid.
12. Argument B and the others remind us that self-reference can be
indirect. B's premise contains an expression referring to a piece of
discourse of which that premise is a part. Further, whether a sentence
leads to paradox may depend on how the world is, on whether certain
other sentences are true (as Epimenides showed). A is contradictory only
if God might exist. Moreover, the semantic paradoxes cannot be evaded
simply by denying excluded middle (for truth and for validity). A , B and
C can be proven to be valid, just as a, fi and y can be proven to be true.
Lastly, semantic closure does not mean simply 'contains its own truthpredicate,'
though that is a useful shorthand for it. There are other
semantic concepts besides truth and falsity, and paradox can arise
through them too. Validity is one.
That is what Pseudo-Scotus, and others, should have seen. A leads to
paradox independently of any account of validity. The proper account
of validity has no more to deny the validity of A (and B and C) than the
proper account of truth has to deny that the Liar sentence is true.
(Though perhaps the proper accounts do do this.) Unfortunately, the
194 S T E P H E N R E A D
classical account of validity emerges unscathed from Pseudo-Scotus*
attack.1 6
University of St. Andrews
N O T E S
1
See Pseudo-Scotus 1891-5, question 10 (pp. 103a-108a), p. 104b. The relevant
text is reproduced in Spade 1975, 44-5 and the whole question in Pozzi 1978,
150-60. An English translation is given in the Appendix to the present volume
(pp. 000-000). The objection was discussed in Mates 1965a, and also retold, with
little or no comment, in Moody 1953, 69, Kneale and Kneale 1962, 287-8, Mates
1965b, 213, McDermott 1972, 288-90, Ashworth 1974, 184, and Boh 1982,
308-9.
2
Indeed, all the printed texts of the treatise, from 1500 onwards, attribute it to
Scotus.
3
See Read 1993, 236 n. 10. Indeed, McDermott (1972, 274) and Back (1996,
205-7, 274-8) take the questions on the Sophisticis Elenchis (also printed in
volume 2 of Wadding's Opera Omnia of Scotus, 1-80), on the Prior Analytics
(ibid., 81-197) and on the Posterior Analytics (ibid., 199-347) all to have the
same author, viz John of Cornwall or Cornubia, Note that both extant mss. of the
questions on the Sophisticis Elenchis, unlike those of the other two commentaries,
explicitly ascribe them to Scotus.
4
The principle alluded to is K: L(p 3 q) z> (Lp z> Lq). See, e.g., Hughes and
Cresswell 1996, 25.
s
See, e.g., Martin 1993 and Panaccio 1993.
6
See Tarski 1956, §1.
7
One has also of course to ensure that the deduction of the contradiction does not
use methods of argument only justifiable classically. The deduction which follows
is acceptable in a relevance logic such as FE of Anderson and Belnap 1975.
8
1 have expressed by own reservations about this manner of solution in Read 1984,
425.
9
Albert's example is 'If God exists, some conditional is false' on hypothesis that
this is the only conditional. The effect is the same. Similarly with % a n
d 5 below.
1 0
Albert and Buridan use 'A man is a jackass' in place of 'God does not exist.'
1 1
Ashworth 1974, 125 and Roure 1962, 275-6. Again, 'A man is a jackass' is
commonly used in place of 'God does not exist.'
1 2
It is often claimed that the medievals, following Aristotle's lead, did not clearly
distinguish arguments from conditionals (e.g., Mates 1965b, 133, Boh 1982, 306).
This is certainly not true of Jean of Celaya, who used C and y to observe that a
true conditional could correspond to an invalid argument and a false conditional to
a valid one: see Ashworth 1974, 125 and Roure 1962, 262.
1 3
See Rosser 1936, 89 (Theorem II), and Kleene 1952/71, 204-13 (Theorem 29).
1 4
If f- -A(0), 1- ~A(1), ..., then not V 3xA(x).
1 5
See Read 1984 and Spade 1982, 249.
S E L F - R E F E R E N C E A N D V A L I D I T Y REVISITED 195
1 6
This paper is a revision and expansion of my 'Self-Reference and Validity,'
Synthese, 42, 1979, 265-74. The major changes consist in the addition of new §§2,
4 and 7. The reader may be interested to see subsequent discussion of the issues in
Priest and Routley 1982, Sorensen 1988, 299-310 and Drange 1990.
REFERENCES
Albert of Saxony, 1988. "Insolubles," transl. N . Kretzmann and E. Stump, in The
Cambridge Translations of Medieval Philosophical Texts: Volume One: Logic
and the Philosophy of Language, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press,
337-68.
Anderson, A.R. and Belnap, N.D., 1975. Entailment: the logic of relevance and
necessity, vol. I, Princeton, Princeton University Press.
Ashworth, E. J., 1974. Language and Logic in the Post-Medieval Period,
Dordrecht, D. Reidel.
Back, A., 1996. Reduplicatives, Leiden, Brill.
Bendiek, J., 1952. "Die Lehre von den Konsequenzen bei Pseudo-Scotus,"
Franzikanischer Studien 34, 205-34.
Boh, Ivan, 1982. "Consequences," in N. Kretzmann, A. Kenny, J. Pinborg and E.
Stump (eds.), The Cambridge History of Later Medieval Philosophy from the
Rediscovery of Aristotle to the Disintegration of Scholasticism, 1100—1600,
Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 300-14.
Drange, W., 1990. "Liar Syllogisms," Analysis 50, 1-7.
Emden, A. B., 1959. A Biographical Register of the University of Oxford to
A.D. 1500, vol. 3, Oxford, Oxford University Press.
Gal, G., 1977. "Adam of Wodeham's Question on the 'Complexe significabile' as
the Immediate Object of Scientific Knowledge," Franciscan Studies 37, 66-102.
Geach, P. T., 1954-5. "On Insolubilia," Analysis 15, 71-2.
Hughes, G. E., 1982. John Buridan on Self-Reference, Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press.
Hughes, G. E., and Cresswell, M . , 1996. A New Introduction to Modal Logic,
Routledge, London.
Kleene, S.C., 1952/71. Introduction to Metamathematics, North-Holland,
Amsterdam.
Kneale, William, and Kneale, Martha, 1962. The Development of Logic, Oxford,
Oxford University Press.
Lob, M. H., 1955. "Solution of a Problem of Leon Henkin," Journal of Symbolic
Logic 20, 115-8.
Martin, Christopher J., 1993 "Obligations and Liars," in S. Read (ed.), Sophisms
in Medieval Logic and Grammar, (Nijhoff International Philosophy Series 48),
Dordrecht, Kluwer, 357-381. Revised version in the present collection, pp.
65-96.
Mates, B., 1965a. "Pseudo-Scotus on the Soundness of Consequentiae" in
Contributions to Logic and Methodology in Honor of J. M. Bochenski, edited
by A.-T, Tymieniecka, Amsterdam, North-Holland, 132—41.
Mates, Benson, 1965b. Elementary Logic, New York, Oxford University Press.
196 S T E P H E N R E A D
McDermott, A. C. S., 1972. "Notes on the Assertoric and Modal Prepositional
Logic of the Pseudo-Scotus," Journal of the History of Philosophy 10,
273-306.
Moody, E.A., 1953. Truth and Consequence in Medieval Logic, Amsterdam,
North-Holland.
Panaccio, C , 1993. "Solving the Insolubles: hints from Ockham and Burley in S.
Read (ed.), Sophisms in Medieval Logic and Grammar, (Nijhoff International
Philosophy Series 48), Dordrecht, Kluwer, 398^10.
Pozzi, Lorenzo, 1978. Le consequentiae nella logica medievale, Padova, Liviana
editrice.
Priest, G., and Routley, R., 1982. "Lessons from Pseudo-Scotus," Philosophical
Studies 42, 189-199.
Prior, A., 1962. "Some problems of self-reference in John Buridan," Proceedings
of the British Academy 48, 281-96.
Pseudo-Scotus, 1891-5. In Librum Primum Priorum Analyticorum Aristotelis
Quaestiones, in Ioannis Duns Scoti Opera Omnia, edited by L. Wadding, Paris,
Vives, vol. 2, 81-177.
Read, S., 1984. Review of Hughes 1982, Australasian Journal of Philosophy 62,
423-6.
Read, S., 1993. "Formal and Material Consequence, Disjunctive Syllogism and
Gamma," in K. Jacobi (ed.), Argumentationstheorie. Scholastische Forschungen
zu den logischen und semantischen Regeln korrekten Folgerns, (Studien und
Texte zur Geisteggeschichte des Mittelateniy, Bd. 38), Leiden, Brill, 233-59.
Rosser, J. B., 1936. "Extensions of some Theorems of Godel and Church,"
Journal of Symbolic Logic 1, 87-91.
Roure, M. L., 1962. "Le traite 'Des Propositions Insolubles' de Jean de Celaya."
Archives d'Histoire Doctrinale el Litteraire du Moyen Age 29, 235-336.
Roure, M . L., 1970. "La problematique des propositions insolubles au XJJIe
siecle
et au debut du XTVe
, suivie de 1'edition des traites de W. Shyreswood, W.
Burley et Th. Bradwardine," Archives d'Histoire Doctrinale et Litteraire du
Moyen Age 37, 205-326.
Scott, T. K., 1966. John Buridan: Sophisms on Meaning and Truth, New York,
Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Sorensen, R., 1988. Blindspols, Oxford, Clarendon Press.
Spade, Paul Vincent, 1975. The Medieval Liar, Toronto, Pontifical Institute of
Mediaeval Studies.
Spade, Paul Vincent, 1982. "Insolubilia," in The Cambridge History of Later
Medieval Philosophy from the Rediscovery of Aristotle to the Disintegration of
Scholasticism, 1100-1600, N. Kretzmann, A. Kenny, J. Pinborg and E. Stump
(eds.), Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 246-53,
Tarski, A., 1956. "The Concept of Truth in Formalized Languages," transl. in his
Logic, Semantics, Metamathematics, (ed.) J.H. Woodger, Oxford, Oxford
University Press.
P A R T III
T R A N S L A T I O N S
A N O N Y M O U S 13 C E N T U R Y A U T H O R
T H E E M M E R A N T R E A T I S E O N F A L S E 1
POSITIO
Since there are various ways in which a respondent can be obligated in a
disputation, we must now discuss that <type of> obligation which is
called false positio. Thus, we must see what it is to posit and what positio
is. But first we should note that every obligation consists of two [parts],
namely of the opponent's positio and the respondent's consent. For the
respondent is not obligated i f he does not consent [to it].
1. W H A T POSITIO IS
To posit is to prefix the verb[al phrase] it is posited that to some
statement in some disputation in order for it to be upheld as a truth. I
say "the verb[al phrase] it is posited that" because sometimes obligation
occurs with the verb to demand, and such an obligation is called a petitio.
From this it is obvious that positio is giving a prefix to some
statement so that it will be upheld as true for the purpose of seeing what
follows from it.
And we must note that this obligation is not called false positio
because only falsehoods would be posited, but because they are posited
more often than truths. Since every positio occurs for the sake o f
concession, and one must concede truths because o f their truth, they
need no positio. But since falsehoods do not have a cause for concession
in themselves, they need a positio so that they can be conceded and we
can see what follows.
2. H O W A POSITIO H A S TO B E R E C E I V E D
And we must note that since [it is] statements [that] can be posited, we
need to know that there are some statements which can be posited—that
is: such that from their positio no contradiction follows—and others
which cannot be posited—that is: such that from their positio a
contradiction follows. The following are of the [latter] kind: a falsehood
is posited, something dissimilar from truth is posited, something similar
199
M. Yrjonsuuri (ed.), Medieval Formal Logic 199-215.
© 2001 Kluwer Academic Publishers. Printed in the Netherlands.
200 A N O N Y M O U S 13 C E N T U R Y A U T H O R
to falsehood is posited and anything convertible [with these]. For given
that one could posit the statement a falsehood is posited, then a
contradiction would follow, i f one posits that a falsehood is posited and
then says that the time is finished. And this is questioned [in the following
way]: The positum was either false or true. If true, then a falsehood
is posited was true. Therefore, a falsehood was posited. And nothing but
this. Therefore, this was a falsehood and this was the positum. Thus the
positum was false. If false, then a falsehood is posited was false.
Therefore, no falsehood was posited. And something had been posited.
Therefore, a truth. But nothing but this. Therefore, it was a truth. And it
was said that it was false. Because of this [argument], one must say that
this [statement] cannot be posited, since a contradiction follows from its
positio.
2.1 Some rules
Moreover, the following rules are given about statements which cannot
be posited:
[I] If a statement which cannot be posited is conjoined to a true
statement by a disjunctive connection, that whole can be
posited correctly.
Thus the following can be posited correctly: a falsehood is posited or
God exists, because when it is said that the time is finished, one can hold
that it is true because of the part God exists so without any contradiction
following,
[II] If a statement which cannot be posited is conjoined to a false
statement by a disjunctive connection, that whole cannot be
posited.
Thus the following whole cannot be posited: a falsehood is posited or
Socrates is a donkey, because when it is said that the time is finished,
then a contradiction follows.
Moreover:
[III] If a statement which cannot be posited is conjoined to a true
statement by a conjunctive connection, that whole cannot be
posited.
T H E E M M E R A N TREATISE O N F A L S E POSITIO 201
Thus the following whole cannot be posited: a falsehood is posited and
God exists, because given that it was posited, then a contradiction
follows when it is said that the time is finished.
Moreover:
[IV] If a statement which cannot be posited is conjoined to a false
statement with a conjunctive connection, the whole can be
posited correctly.
Thus the following whole can be posited correctly: a falsehood is posited
and Socrates is a donkey, because when it is said that the time is
finished, one can hold that the positum was false so that a contradiction
does not follow.
By this [the following] holds, i f it is posited that a falsity is posited or
Marcus is called Tullius <and> i f Marcus and Tullius are names of the
same [person], Marcus is called Tullius is a truth, and thus due to this
part the whole can be posited correctly, without a contradiction
following. But if they are names of different [persons], Marcus is called
Tullius is a falsehood, and thus [the whole] cannot be posited.
Likewise, we must note that this and the positum are similar cannot
be posited, i f it is conjoined to something false. Thus the following can
in no way be posited: 'It is posited that you are a bishop and the
positum are similar.' For given that one could posit this, then a
contradiction would follow in the following way: The time is finished.
The positum was either true or false. If true, then it was true that you
are a bishop and the positum are similar. But it was false that you are a
bishop. Therefore, the positum was false, and it was said that it was true.
If false, then it was false that you are a bishop and the positum are
similar. Therefore, you are a bishop and the positum were not similar,
and they were of some kind. Therefore, they were dissimilar. But it was
false that you are a bishop. Therefore, the positum was true. Because o f
this [argument] one must say that it cannot be posited.
And in similar cases the same judgement applies.
Likewise, it must be recognized that a positio is sometimes excluded by
[that which is] put forward or by the response. Thus, when it is said: " i t
is posited that the positum and [that which is] put forward are similar,"
one must say that in one contingent case [the statement] can be posited,
in another not. If indeed a truth is posited,2
it can be correctly posited.
If a falsehood it cannot. Similarly, when it is said: it is posited that the
positum and [that which is] put forward are dissimilar, one must say
that in one contingent case it can be posited, in another not. If indeed a
202 A N O N Y M O U S 13 C E N T U R Y A U T H O R
truth is put forward, it cannot be posited. But i f a falsehood, it can be
posited correctly.
3. H O W O N E M U S T RESPOND TO T H E POSITUM
Now that we have seen what a positio is and how it has to be received, we
must see how one should respond to the positum.
3.1 Some rules
About this the following rules are given:
[V] If the respondent knows that the positum is put forward to
him, he must concede it i f it can be conceded.
I say " i f the respondent knows that the positum is put forward to h i m "
because i f it is posited that Socrates is white and Marcus is white is
posited, the respondent need not concede it unless he knows that
Socrates is white is signified by it. I say " i f it can be conceded," since
there are some statements which cannot be conceded although they can
be posited, such as: afalsity is conceded. Indeed, given that this a falsity
is conceded is posited, no contradiction follows from the positio, and
thus it can be posited correctly. But given that it is conceded, a
contradiction follows from the concession. Thus this statement can be
correctly posited, but nevertheless it cannot be conceded.
Likewise, we must note that
[VI] If the respondent doubts whether the positum is put forward
to him, he must not simply concede or deny it, but he must
say: "prove it."
For example: it is posited that Socrates is white and Marcus is either a
name of Socrates or of Plato, but you do not know of which. If Marcus
is white is posited, since the respondent doubts whether the name Marcus
is a name of Socrates or of Plato, he must respond: "prove it."
Moreover:
[VII] Everything that follows3
from the positum must be conceded,
if it can be conceded.
Thus, i f it is posited that Socrates is white and Socrates is colored is put
forward, one must concede it during the positio, because it follows from
T H E E M M E R A N TREATISE O N F A L S E POSITIO 203
the positum. For it follows correctly that if Socrates is white, Socrates is
colored.
[X] Everything that is incompatible with the positum must be
denied, i f it can be denied.
And we must note that something is said to follow from the positum
when the positum cannot be true without it; that is, i f the positum is
true, it is true. Something is said to be incompatible, when its
contradictory opposite follows from the positum. Thus, i f it is posited
that Socrates is white and during the positio [the statement] Socrates is
not colored is posited, one must deny it, because its contradictory
opposite follows from the positum, namely that Socrates is colored.
Moreover: 'If it can be conceded' or '[if it can be] denied' are posited
in the preceding rules because there are some statements, which cannot
be conceded or denied although they either are posited, follow from the
positum or are incompatible with the positum. The following are like
this: falsehood is conceded, falsehood is denied. For given that the
statement falsehood is conceded could be conceded, a contradiction
would follow as has been said above. Similarly, we must note that
falsehood is denied can in no way be denied. Thus, although these
statements can be correctly posited, they nevertheless cannot be
conceded or denied.
Likewise, we must note that
[IX] Everything that follows from a statement or statements
which have been conceded, together with the positum, must
be conceded, if it can be conceded.
Moreover:
[X] Everything that is incompatible with a statement or
statements which have been conceded, together with the
positum, must be denied, if it can be denied.
Likewise, we must note that during a false positio, not only those
statements to which one correctly responds "it is true" are said to be
conceded, but also contradictory opposites of those one has correctly
denied. Thus, i f I deny Socrates is white, I am said to concede Socrates is
not white. Similarly, not only is that to which one responds "it is false"
said to be denied, but also the contradictory opposite of that which one
concedes.
It is also a rule that:
204 A N O N Y M O U S 13 C E N T U R Y A U T H O R
[XI] When something false and possible has been posited,
something false and possible must sometimes be conceded,
not when put forward in any order, but in some [order].
As in the following case: The truth of the matter is that Socrates is
black. It is posited that he is white. Next this is put forward: Socrates is
white and you are not a bishop. This is something false that does not
follow from the positum. Therefore, one must deny it. Therefore, its
contradictory opposite must be conceded, namely this: [it is] not [the
case that] Socrates is white and you are not a bishop. But Socrates is
white; this is the positum. Therefore, it must be conceded. Therefore, [it
is] not [the case that] you are not a bishop. Therefore, you are a bishop.
It is obvious therefore that one must concede this falsehood in this
order, since it follows from the positum and those statements which
have been correctly conceded with the positum. But i f it were put
forward in the first place, one would have to deny it, since it would be
something false that does not follow.
And in similar cases the same judgement applies.
3.2 Some sophisms
Moreover, the following objections are raised against the preceding rules.
The truth of the matter is that Socrates is necessarily white and Plato is
contingently black. Then it is said "it is possible that Plato is white." It
is posited. Then the following is put forward: Plato is of some kind. This
is something true which is not incompatible with the positum.
Therefore, one must concede it. Similarly, the following is put forward:
Socrates is not such. This is something true and not repugnant.
Therefore, one must concede it. (That it is true and not incompatible is
proved as follows: I want to take these two adjectives of some kind and
such so that they join whiteness and blackness <to the subjects>. But the
adjective of some kind is used to join the colour that Plato has <to the
subject>. But Socrates does not have that kind of color.) A n d Socrates is
white. Therefore, Plato is not white. The time is finished. Y o u have
conceded the contradictory opposite of the positum. Therefore, <you
have responded> badly.
Likewise, the truth of the matter is that Socrates sees some man
necessarily, and it is impossible for Socrates and Plato to see the same
[person]. Nevertheless Plato can certainly see that which Socrates sees.
Then it is said: "Socrates sees some man; it is possible for Plato to see
T H E E M M E R A N TREATISE O N F A L S E POSITIO 205
him." It is posited. Socrates sees some man; Plato sees him. If one
denies [this], the time is finished. Y o u have denied the positum retained
in the same verbal form. Therefore, <you have responded> badly. If one
responds /'/ is true, it is inferred that therefore Socrates and Plato see the
same [person]. The time is finished. Y o u have conceded something
[which is] impossible in itself on the basis of a possible positio.
Therefore, <you have responded> badly.
Likewise, two contingent contradictorily opposite sentences are
pointed out to you. "One of these is true, it is possible that the other is
true." This is posited. Then this is put forward: one of these is true. This
is something necessary. Therefore, one must concede it. Then: the other
is true. If one denies it, the time is finished. Y o u have denied the positum
in the same verbal form in which it was posited. Therefore, <you have
responded> badly. If one responds: "it is true," it is inferred: therefore
both of these are true. The time is finished. Y o u have conceded
something [which is] impossible in itself on the basis of a possible
positio. Therefore, <you have responded> badly.
Likewise, the truth of the matter is that Socrates and Plato are white.
"It is possible that only one of them is white." It is posited. One of them
is white. This is something true and not repugnant. Therefore, one must
concede it. Then this is put forward: the other is white. If it is conceded,
the time is finished. Y o u have conceded something that was
incompatible with the positum. Therefore, you have responded badly.
For it follows correctly that if only one of these is white, the other is not
white. A n d you have conceded the opposite. Therefore, <you have
responded> badly. If it is denied, [one can argue] against: the other is
white is either Socrates is white or Plato [is white]. But each of these is
something true and not incompatible. A n d you have denied it.
Therefore, [you have responded] badly.
3.3 Solutions
To the first sophism some [people] give the solution that one must deny
this: Socrates is not such, because it is incompatible in this verbal form.
But if it was put forward in this [form]: Socrates is not black, one would
have to concede it, since it would not be incompatible.
Others say that this is something false that does not follow. Thus one
must deny it. For it does not follow that i f Plato is white, Plato is o f
some kind and Socrates is not such. And thus it is something false that
206 A N O N Y M O U S 13 C E N T U R Y A U T H O R
does not follow, because this adjective of some kind is restricted to
joining whiteness by the adjective white posited in the positio.
To the second and the third sophism some [people] say that the
positio must be accepted and [those sentences which] are put forward
must be conceded, but the arguments made are not valid, since in them
one proceeds from disjuncts to something conjoined.
Others say that a relative [pronoun] can refer to the signified accident
as belonging to the substance. Thus, when it is said: "Socrates sees some
man; it is possible for Plato to see him," one must say: "this is false,
rather: it is impossible" since its sense is that it is possible for Plato to
see that [person] whom Socrates sees. Similarly, when it is said: "one o f
these is true, [and] it is possible that the other is true," one must say
"this is false, indeed: it is impossible" because its sense is that it is
possible that what is other than true is true.
Those who uphold this solution, say to the last sophism that the other
is white must be denied. For when it is said "the other is white means
either Socrates is white or Plato [is white]," one must say "this is false,
for it rather means Socrates, who is other than the white, is white or
Plato, who is other than the white, is white" But whichever of these is
signified, it is something false that does not follow, and thus one must
deny it.
3.4 Rules continued
Moreover, we must note that because a false positio sometimes binds the
respondent to conceding something false, so that the respondent appears
to be involved in fallacy, it is usually said that in this problem the truth
of the matter must be hidden and, as a result, one must not answer
[questions about] which or why or when, or any substantial question,
during a false positio. This is obvious in the following example: It is
posited that this word mulier is masculine.4
Then this is put forward:
mulier albus est. If one answers "it is true" or "it is false" or "prove it,"
on the contrary: Y o u have replied to mulier albus est, which is
ungrammatical, as i f it was grammatical; and it does not follow that it
would be grammatical. Therefore, [you answered] badly. In fact, it does
not follow that i f this word mulier is masculine, then this mulier^ albus
est would be grammatical, since the word album could change its gender.
From this is is clear that one must say to mulier albus est either " y o u
speak nonsense" or "you are not saying anything." But i f it is said that
these words together signify something and there is no discord of gender,
T H E E M M E R A N TREATISE O N F A L S E POSITIO 207
number or case, then one must say "it is true," but when it is said "nor o f
any other [grammatical] property," one must say "it is false." But i f it is
asked "which one?", one must not answer, because the truth of the
matter must be hidden during a false positio.
Moreover, we must note that although a false positio binds one to
conceding something false, the aim [of the opponent] is [to provoke a]
bad response. But sometimes it happens that when the truth of the
matter is hidden, the respondent must concede that he answers badly.
This is obvious in the following example: it is posited that you concede
that Socrates is a donkey. Then this is put forward: you concede
Socrates to be a donkey. This is the positum and it is put forward in the
same verbal form in which it was posited. Therefore, one must concede
it. If one concedes it, against: Y o u concede that Socrates is a donkey.
But that Socrates is a donkey is impossible. Therefore, you have
conceded something impossible on the basis o f a possible positio.
Therefore, [you have responded] badly.
Therefore, it is obvious that sometimes it happens that the respondent
must concede that he is responding badly during the positio, because
it follows from the positum. But i f it is said: "The time is finished. Y o u
conceded that you were responding badly, therefore, you responded
badly," this does not follow, but rather "therefore, you responded
correctly."
Furthermore, keeping the same positio one can make the following
objection. Y o u concede that Socrates is a donkey. But that Socrates is a
donkey is a falsehood. Therefore, you concede a falsehood. The time is
finished. When you have conceded this: you concede a falsehood, this
was either true or false. If true, then it was true that you concede a falsehood.
Therefore, you have conceded a falsehood. And nothing but this.
Therefore, it is false. And it was said that [it is] true. If false, then it was
false that you concede a falsehood. Therefore, you have not conceded a
falsehood. A n d you have conceded something. Therefore, a truth. A n d
nothing but this. Therefore, this is true. And it was said that it was false.
Because of this one must note that when two acts determine the
application of this verb it is posited, the respondent is not obliged to
concede only one of them, but both together. Thus, when it is said it is
posited that you concede that Socrates is a donkey, I am not obliged by
this to concede only Socrates is a donkey, but the [following] whole
together: / concede that Socrates is a donkey. Thus, i f this is put
forward: Socrates is a donkey, one must deny it. But i f it is said you are
obliged to concede that Socrates is a donkey, one must say "it is false."
208 A N O N Y M O U S 1 3 m
C E N T U R Y A U T H O R
That is, I am not obliged to concede that Socrates is a donkey but the
following: that I concede that Socrates is a donkey.
But i f it is said, keeping the same positio, "a possible positio has been
put to you," this is a truth which is not incompatible. Therefore, it must
be conceded. Then the following is put forward: No other obligation is
put to you. Therefore you should not concede [anything] impossible, but
you must concede that Socrates is a donkey, and that Socrates is a
donkey is impossible. Therefore, you concede [something] impossible.
The time is finished. Y o u have conceded two contradictory opposites in
the same disputation. Therefore, [you have responded] badly.
In this case, one can say that to the following: you must concede that
Socrates is a donkey one must say "it is false, indeed, [I am rather
bound] to this whole: I have to concede that Socrates is a donkey."
Alternatively, one can say that to the following: a possible positio has
been put to you one must say "it is true." But when it is said "but no
other obligation is put to you," one must say "it is false," even i f it is
something true, because it is incompatible. For it follows correctly that i f
you must concede [something] impossible on the basis of a possible
positio, some other obligation has been put to you. Thus the following is
incompatible: no other obligation is put to you.
Moreover, even if it is given as a rule that everything true that is not
incompatible with the positum must be conceded, nevertheless it sometimes
happens that a truth that is not incompatible with the positum
must be denied, because the answer to it is given for an instant at which
it was false. As in the following example: As things are, Socrates is black
at the moment of the positio, and at the moment of the first statement
after the positum he will be white. Then it is said: "it is posited that
Socrates is white." Then the following is put forward: Socrates is white
and you are not a bishop. This is something true which is not
incompatible with the positum. And it was false at the moment of the
positio. And one must answer in relation to that [instant]. Therefore,
you must deny it. We concede this because of this [above mentioned]
reason. And the following argument is not valid: This is something true
which is not incompatible with the positum, and you have denied it.
Therefore, you have responded badly. Indeed, one must add: and you
have not denied it for the moment at which it was false, and this is false.
3.5 About a rule which is usually given
Moreover, it is usually given as a rule that
T H E E M M E R A N TREATISE O N F A L S E POSITIO 209
[XII] When anything false and possible is posited concerning the
present instant, it must be denied that [the present instant
exists].
Thus, if A is the present instant and as a matter of fact Socrates is black,
and it is posited that Socrates is white, then if the following is put
forward: A exists, one must deny it, since then it would follow that
Socrates is white at A, which is impossible. But if the following is said: "A
exists is something true which is not incompatible with the positum and
you have denied it, therefore, you have answered badly," one must say:
this is not valid, because although it is not incompatible with what has
been put forward, it is incompatible with the positum and [something
that is] held to be a truth. For it follows correctly that if Socrates is
white and he is not white at A, A does not exist, given that one holds
that Socrates is not white in A is true.
3.6 An objection
But the following objection is raised against [this argument]: When it is
said it is posited that Socrates is white, the verb is either conjoins
whiteness [to the subject] with respect to this instant discretely, or with
respect to instants in general, or with respect to the instant at which
Socrates will be white. If with respect to this instant discretely,
something impossible is posited, and thus it is no wonder if something
impossible is conceded. If for instants in general, either it is in general
with respect to this instant or with respect to some other [instant]. If
with respect to this instant, that is impossible, if with respect to another
[instant], that is possible. And when it is inferred therefore, Socrates is
white at A, this does not follow, because the verb is does not conjoin
whiteness [to the subject] with respect to this instant, but with respect to
another [instant]. Thus, the proposition Socrates is white is equivalent
to this: Socrates will be white, according to this [explanation]. And if
this verb is conjoins whiteness [to the subject] with respect to the instant
at which Socrates will be white, let that instant be B. Then it is posited
that Socrates is white at B. But this is either posited with respect to this
[present] instant or with respect to that [instant] at which Socrates is
white. If with respect to this [present] instant, that is impossible, and
thus it is no wonder if something impossible follows. If with respect to
that [instant] at which Socrates will be white, it is possible and the
following argument is not valid for the above mentioned reason.
210 A N O N Y M O U S 13 C E N T U R Y A U T H O R
Others solve [the problem] otherwise. That is, they distinguish
between the impossible per se and the impossible per accidens. T h e
impossible per se is that which cannot in any way be true, namely when
the form which is predicated is naturally incompatible with the thing
which is the subject, as in the following: a man is a donkey. And this
kind of impossible [statement] must not be conceded on the basis o f a
possible positio. The impossible per accidens is that which is not
impossible by itself (per se) but by virtue of something else (per aliud).
That is: with respect to some determination, namely when the form
which is predicated is not naturally incompatible with the thing which is
the subject, as in the following: Socrates is white. For whiteness is not
naturally incompatible with Socrates, but [only] with respect to this
[present] instant. A n d this kind of impossible [statement] can be
correctly conceded on the basis of a possible positio.
3.7 Continued
Moreover, we must note that it is the same [thing] to posit the whole
conjunctive sentence and to posit both o f its parts. For in both cases the
respondent is bound to concede both parts. But one must note that it is
not the same [thing] to posit the whole disjunctive sentence and to posit
one of the parts not knowing which one. For i f the whole disjunctive
sentence is posited, then to the part which is first put forward one must
answer in accordance with its own quality.6
To the part that is put
forward in the second place, one must answer "it is true"—even i f it is
something false—because it follows from the positum and [the opposites]
of correctly denied statements together with the positum. Thus, i f
the following whole sentence is posited: Socrates is white or Plato is
white, and both [parts] are false, then to this Socrates is white, i f it is put
forward first, one must answer "it is false," since it is a falsehood that
does not follow from the positum. But to this: Plato is white, i f it is put
forward later, one must answer "it is true," even i f it is something false,
because it follows from the positum and [the opposites] o f correctly denied
statements together with the positum. For it follows correctly that
if Socrates [is white] or Plato is white and [it is] not [the case that] Socrates
is white, then Plato is white. And i f one of the parts is posited and
it is not known which one, then one must answer to both parts: "prove
it," for about each part one is uncertain whether it is the positum.
T H E E M M E R A N TREATISE O N F A L S E POSITIO 211
3.8 A sophism
From this the solution of the following sophism is obvious. A s a matter
of fact Socrates is black. And it is posited that Socrates is white or you
have to concede that Socrates is white. A n d the whole disjunctive
sentence is posited. Then the following is put forward: Socrates is white.
This is something false which does not follow from the positum.
Therefore, one must deny it. Then it is put forward that you have to
concede that Socrates is white. This follows from the positum and [the
opposites] of correctly denied statements together with the positum.
Therefore, one must concede it. For from Socrates is white or you have
to concede that Socrates is white and [it is] not [the case that] Socrates is
white, it follows correctly that you have to concede that Socrates is
white. If one concedes it, against this: That Socrates is white does not
follow from the positum, or from [the opposite] of a correctly denied
statement, or from correctly conceded statements together with the
positum, or from any obligated [proposition]. A n d you have to concede
it. Therefore, it is true. The time is finished. Y o u have conceded two
contradictory opposites. Therefore, you have answered badly.
3.9 Solution
Solution. To this Socrates is white, which it is put forward in the first
place, one must answer "it is false," since it is a falsehood which does not
follow from the positum. But to this: you have to concede that Socrates
is white, which is put forward in the second place, one must answer "it is
true"—even i f it is something false—because it follows from the positum
and [the opposites] of correctly denied statements together with the
positum, as has been proved above. But when it is said "that Socrates is
white does not follow from the positum etc.," then i f all the causes o f
conceding [a proposition] are listed, one must answer "it is false." But i f
some [causes] are listed and not all, one must say "it is true." But one
must deny the statement in which [all] those causes are listed, even i f it
is true, because it is repugnant to the positum and [something] correctly
conceded with the positum.
212 A N O N Y M O U S 13 C E N T U R Y A U T H O R
3.10 Whether a positio containing a relative [term] must be upheld
Now we must see how one should sustain a positio containing a relative
[term]. But that such a positio need not be upheld is proved as follows:
Every concession exists with respect to some specific thing. Thus, since
positio exists with respect to concession, every positio exists with
respect to some specific thing. But since a positio which contains a
relative [term] does not exist with respect to some specific thing, it
seems that it need not be sustained. But this reason is not sufficient. For
I can correctly bind myself to something specifically or non-specifically.
Assuming therefore that such a positio should be sustained, we must
see how it should be sustained.
3.11 How it should be sustained
We must note that when a positio contains a relative [term] related [to a
term] with distributive supposition, one must concede all the singulars of that
universal. Thus, when it is said: "every man exists; it is posited that he is
running," one must concede all these: Socrates is running, Plato is running and
so on for other cases. Similarly, when it is said: "Socrates exists; it is
posited that he is ruining," one mist concede this singular: £oerates is running.
3.12 Concerning a doubt
But when a positio is made with a relative [term] related to a term with
determinate supposition, it is uncertain how one should judge. Some judge
that when it is said "a man exists; it is posited that he is running," (if
there are only three men, Socrates, Plato and Cicero), then i f the three
singulars are put forward, one must answer to the two first put forward
"it is false since I am not bound to these." But to the last one put
forward one must say "it is true, not because I am bound to that one but
because I am bound to at least one."
Others say that one must answer to each according to its own quality.
And the following argument is not valid: you are bound to at least one,
and you have conceded none; therefore, you have answered badly. This
[claim of invalidity] is clear from the [following] explanation: / was
bound to at least one indeterminately, and I have conceded none
determinately; therefore I have responded badly, which is not valid. But
T H E E M M E R A N TREATISE O N F A L S E POSITIO 213
if the following were put forward: a man is running, he is running, one
indeed must concede them.
Furthermore, one can say that this is like the natural case when, i f
someone promises to describe something indeterminately, [andhe describes it
determinately], then he does fulfil the promise. Similarly, i f I oblige
myself to concede something indeterminately, and I concede something
determinately, then I fulfil the promise. Thus, if one of these [statements] is
put forward to me and I concede it, then I have fulfilled the promise.
3.13 Continued
Moreover, we must note that it sometimes happens that impossible
statements are conceded in a dependent form, as some [people] say. But
this impossible statement is conceded on the basis of a possibility.
3.14 Sophism
As in the following example: A s a matter of fact Socrates is black. It is
posited that he is white. Then the following is put forward: A color is in
Socrates. It is whiteness. If one answers "it is false" or "prove it," it is
proved as follows: Whiteness is in Socrates. And it is a color. Therefore,
a color is in Socrates. And it is whiteness. If one concedes it, against this:
Y o u have conceded that it is whiteness. But it is whiteness was blackness
is whiteness. But this is impossible. Therefore, you have conceded
something impossible on the basis of a possible positio etc. Therefore,
you have answered badly.
3.15 Solution
Solution. Some [people] say that the last argument is not valid, namely
the following: You have conceded something impossible on the basis of
a possible positio etc. Therefore, you have answered badly. For I have
conceded this impossible statement on the basis of a possible
[statement].
But it can be solved otherwise. If you were to sustain that Socrates is
white, you would deny Socrates is black, as if you knew that Socrates was
in fact white. But if you knew that Socrates was in fact white, then behind the
verbal form it is whiteness there was whiteness is whiteness? But this is
214 A N O N Y M O U S 13 C E N T U R Y A U T H O R
not impossible. A n d so you did not concede [anything] impossible, for i f
you knew the truth of the matter you were bound to give this answer.
3.16 Continued
Moreover, we must note that just as this statement / posit a falsehood
cannot be posited by anyone, similarly this statement Socrates posits a
falsehood cannot be posited by Socrates, but it can be correctly posited
by others. A n d in similar cases the same judgement applies.
About those statements to which one cannot answer correctly, it is
usually said that they can be correctly posited, in accordance with the
following rule:
[XIII] Only those statements cannot be posited from whose positio
a contradiction follows immediately.
Thus since from their positio a contradiction does not follow
immediately, they can be correctly posited.
But against this: Every positum must be conceded in order to see what
happens then. But this seeing consists of opposition and response.
Therefore, i f there cannot be a response, there cannot be a positio, since
[the positio] takes place forthe sake of that [response]. Therefore, since
such statements cannot be answered, such statements cannot be posited.
Furthermore, every positio takes place for the sake of disputation. A
disputation consists of opposition and response. Therefore, i f a response
cannot be based on such [statements], there cannot be a positio. But a
response cannot be based on such [statements]. Therefore, they cannot
be posited.
This is conceded by some [people] for the [above mentioned] reason.
And according to this [opinion] the following argument is not valid:
From fie positio a contradiction does notfollow. Therefore, such statements
can be posited. For [the argument] proceeds from insufficient [premises],8
for one must add: and when these are posited there can be a disputation
and a response and it can be seen what follows then. But this is false.
Or one can say that it can be correctly posited. And according to this
[opinion] the following argument is not valid: Every positio takes place
for the sake of the response. But there cannot be a response. Therefore,
there cannot be a positio. A n example [of similar form]: Every man
exists for happiness. But that man is not happy. Therefore, he is not a
man. This is not valid.
And this is enough about false positio?
T H E E M M E R A N TREATISE O N F A L S E POSITIO 215
NOTES
1
Reading throughout the treatisefalsa instead of De Rijk's emendation falsi, when
combined with positio. Cf. De Rijk's footnote on p. 98.
2
The author uses the verb pono (to posit) in a role in which later authors
consistently use propono (to put forward). This causes some ambiguity here (and
below in some cases).
Omitting the second sequens.
4
Mulier = woman. In Latin the adjective albus should agree with the noun, so that
the sentence mulier albus est (a woman is white; albus (white) is masculine) would
be grammatical if mulier really was masculine. As a feminine, mulier requires the
feminine form of the adjective (mulier alba est).
5
Reading mulier instead of homo, since homo est albus is in fact grammatical, and
thus the claim makes no sense about this sentence.
6
The author tacitly assumes that the part which is first put forward is false, and it
must be denied. Without this assumption, the following argument makes no sense.
7
Reading albedinem esse albedinem. Cf. De Rijk's apparatus.
8
Reading Jit enim ab insufficienti for sit enim insufficiencti, which is
unintelligible, as already noted by De Rijk.
9
1 am grateful to Jenny Ashworth for help in many of the problems of translation.
A N O N Y M O U S 131 H
C E N T U R Y A U T H O R
T H E E M M E R A N T R E A T I S E O N I M P O S S I B L E POSITIO
1. T H A T A N IMPOSSIBLE POSITIO M U S T B E U P H E L D
That an impossible positio must be upheld is proved as follows. Just as we
say that something possible must be conceded in order to see what
follows from it, similarly we have it from Aristotle that something
impossible must be conceded in order to see what happens then.
Furthermore, we say that God is a man, and we say that correctly. But
deity and humanity differ more than humanity and donkeyhood in the
course o f nature. Therefore, just as we can understand it to be true that
God is a man, so can we understand it to be true that Socrates is a
donkey. A n d when we can understand, we can posit, and thus concede.
And thus it is clear1
that an impossible positio must be admitted.
Furthermore, we have it from Aristotle that something impossible can
be understood, for he talks about taking a fish from the water so that
nothing assumes its place—which is impossible. Hence it is possible to
understand something impossible. Therefore, since we can posit that
which we can understand, it is clear that an impossible positio must be
accepted and something impossible must be conceded.
Assuming therefore that an impossible positio must be upheld, we
proceed accordingly.
2. H O W A N IMPOSSIBLE POSITIO H A S TO B E C O N S T R U C T E D
Therefore, we must note that one must not concede two contradictory
opposites in this question. For this is the aim [of the opponent] in every
disputation or question. Thus neither in this question nor in [any] other
must one concede two contradictory opposites. Thus, one must note
that no obligation should be accepted which forces the respondent to
concede two contradictory opposites.
Furthermore, one must note that the art of a false positio is the same
as that of an impossible positio. Thus, we must note that just as one must
concede during a false positio all that follows from the positum, so during
217
M. Yrjdnsuuri (ed.), Medieval Formal Logic 217-223.
© 2001 Kluwer Academic Publishers. Printed in the Netherlands.
218 A N O N Y M O U S 131 H
C E N T U R Y A U T H O R
an impossible positio one must concede everything that follows from the
positum. [The word] "follows" means "in accordance with a direct
(recta) consequence. A n d a consequence is direct (recta) when the
understanding of the consequent is contained in the understanding of the
antecedent.
And we should note that in this question everything does not follow
from an impossible obligation. Thus, in this question one must not
concede the consequence of the Adamites—namely that from the
impossible anything follows. Instead one must concede in this question
only those consequences in which the understanding of the consequent is
contained in the understanding of the antecedent. Thus, since one must
admit only that kind of onsequence in this question, one must note that
one must not admit in this question those consequences in which
negation follows from an affirmation. Thus one must not concede the
following kind of consequence: if it is a man, it is not a donkey. This is
clear, i f a man is united with a donkey according to every kind o f
identity.
3. OBJECTIONS
But against this: It is not in the nature of humanity to be compatible
with donkeyhood in the same subject. Therefore, humanity and
donkeyhood cannot be in the same subject. Therefore, it follows
naturally that if it is a man, it is not a donkey.
Furthermore, substantial difference makes a species and divides it from
others. Therefore, rational, since it is a substantial difference, produces
no species other than man. Therefore, it follows correctly: if something
is a man, it is different from [any] other [species]. Therefore, it follows
correctly: if it is a man, it is not a donkey.
4. SOLUTIONS
Solution. Since an impossible positio need not be constructed with
respect to the nature of things, but at the level of understanding, and
since those two forms cannot naturally be in the same subject, it follows
correctly at the level of nature if it is a man, it is not a donkey. But
because one can understand these two forms to be in the [same] subject,
it does not follow at the level of understanding. Thus, when an
impossible positio is taken at the level of understanding, it is clear that
T H E E M M E R A N TREATISE O N IMPOSSIBLE POSITIO 219
during an impossible positio one should not concede a consequence in
which a negation follows from an affirmation.
To the other [objection] we say that the intention of a substantial
form properly and in itself (per se) is to produce a species, and it divides
[that species] from others per accidens, namely by the contrary relation
which it has to others. And since this contrariety is not in the thing, but
in the understanding, it is clear at the level of the understanding that this
does not follow: if it is a man, it is not a donkey.
5. C O N T I N U E D
A n d we should note that although something impossible can be posited,
we should nevertheless note that something impossible from which two
contradictory opposites follow cannot be posited. Thus, i f one makes
the assumption that mortal is included in the definition of man, then this
impossible statement—namely: fa man] exists by necessity—cannot be
posited in any way. Since i f it was posited, then two contradictory
opposites would follow like this: if Socrates is a man, Socrates is a
rational and mortal animal, and if he is rational [and] mortal animal,
he can die; if he exists by necessity, he cannot die. Therefore, if he can
die, he cannot die. From this it is obvious that this kind of impossible
statement cannot be posited in any way.
Moreover, one must note that this impossibility: Socrates ceases to
know that there is nothing he ceases to know cannot be posited in any
way, because then two contradictory opposites would follow—that is:
Socrates ceases to know thai there is nothing he ceases to know and if
he ceases to know that there is nothing he ceases to know, he knows that
there is nothing he ceases to know. And if he knows that there is nothing
he ceases to know, it is true, because everything that is known is true.
And if it is true that there is nothing he ceases to know, there is nothing
Socrates ceases to know. And thus, if Socrates ceases to know, there is
nothing he ceases to know. And thus two contradictory opposites follow.
And thus [this sentence] cannot be posited in any way.
220 A N O N Y M O U S 13 1 H
C E N T U R Y A U T H O R
6. A B O U T A N IMPOSSIBLE POSITIO THAT IS
B R O U G H T A B O U T B Y A UNION
And we must note that an impossible positio is sometimes brought about
by a union, and sometimes without one. And a union, as it is taken here,
is a predication of one on the basis of two.
And one must note that sometimes only a union of essence is made,
and sometimes only of person, and sometimes both of essence and
person. And even i f essence and person are the same and one cannot
exist without the other, nevertheless one can be properly understood
without the other. A n d since it can be understood, it can be correctly
posited, since an impossible positio is made at the level of the
understanding. And essence is the suppositum undeerstood without the
form, and person is the suppositum understood with the form. And we
must note that those terms are called essential which are predicated in
the same way of a whole as of each of its parts, for instance stone, wood
and the like. Those terms are called personal which are not predicated in
the same way of a whole as of each of the parts, for instance, this term
man and this term animal.
Furthermore, we must note that an adjective with a neuter ending is an
essential term.
Now that we have seen what essential and personal terms are, and
what essence, person and union are, we must see how one must answer to
a positio made by a union. Thus, one must note that when the union is
only of essence, i f an essential predication is predicated of one, one must
[also] concede it of the other. But i f a personal predication is predicated
[of one], one must deny it of the other. Thus, i f Socrates is united with
Brunellus with a union only of essence, one must concede this: Socrates
is the same as Brunellus, but deny this: Socrates is Brunellus. But i f the
union is made only of person, the opposite occurs, since i f personal
predication is conceded of one, one must concede it of the other. Thus,
if Socrates is united with Brunellus with a union of person alone, one has
to concede this: Socrates is Brunellus, but deny this: Socrates is the same
as Brunellus.
From this it is clear that in this question an argument from an
adjective with a neuter ending to an adjective with a masculine or a
feminine ending is not valid.
T H E E M M E R A N TREATISE O N IMPOSSIBLE POSITIO 221
7. A QUESTION
But it is possible to ask why an adjective with a neuter ending is any
more an essential term than an adjective with a masculine or a feminine
ending.
To this one should answer that masculine and feminine are imposed by
the form of the thing, and because of this they are called formal terms,
and hence [also] personal. Neuter gender is not imposed by any form
that is in the thing, but rather by pure privation. And so [by it] a thing is
understood without form, and [it is] an essential term.
8. C O N T I N U E D
Moreover, one must note that there are some forms which agree with
[both] essence and person, for instance, whiteness and blackness. Thus,
whatever kind of union is posited: i f one is conceded of one, it must be
conceded of the other. Thus, i f the case is that Socrates is white and
Plato is black and any kind of union is made, one must concede this:
whiteness is in Socrates, and this also follows: blackness is in Socrates.
And this argumentation is not valid: there is whiteness, therefore [it is]
not: [the case that] there is blackness.
Thus one must note that the topic of opposites does not hold in this
question.
Furthermore, one must note that there are some forms which agree
only with person, like growth and decrease. Thus, i f Socrates grows and
Brunellus decreases, and a union of essence alone is made between
Socrates and Brunellus, one should concede this: Socrates grows, but deny
this: Brunellus grows.
And one must note that there are some forms which agree only with
essence. Thus one must note that i f a union of person alone is made,
then i f one has conceded an essential predication of one, one must deny
it of the other. Hence one should note that there are some essential
forms, those which are meant by essential terms, like carnality and
corporeality, and similarly that form which is meant by the term
something.
222 A N O N Y M O U S 1 3 I H
C E N T U R Y A U T H O R
9. A D O U B T
Moreover, there is a common doubt. If a union is made to unite this man
and this donkey, these two [statements] are true: this man is this donkey
and this donkey is this man. But this man will rise again. Therefore, this
donkey will rise again.
Some [people] concede this argument. But it is better to say that there
is a fallacy secundum accidens.
10. A N OBJECTION
Moreover, one must note that just as in a false positio the truth of the
matter is concealed, and the order of the things put forward is taken into
account, so it is in an impossible positio. From this the solution of the
following objection is clear. A s a matter of fact, Socrates is a
grammarian, Plato a grammarian and a musician, and they are united in
every kind o f union. Then the following is proved: Socrates is just a
grammarian. This is something true which is not incompatible with the
positum. Therefore it should be conceded. Similarly Plato is a
grammarian and a musician. This is something true which is not
incompatible etc.
If it is conceded, against this: Socrates is Plato. But Socrates is just a
grammarian. Therefore, Plato is just a grammarian. The time is finished.
You have conceded two contradictory opposites in the same disputation.
Therefore [you have responded] badly.
A n example: This is a count. This is a bishop. And this bishop
celebrates a mass. Therefore count [celebrate a mass]. [This] is not
valid.
And one must note that just as a union is made between living things,
so one can be made between inanimate things and between statements.
11. A QUESTION
Furthermore, it is asked whether from a union of statements a union o f
things follows. This is proved as follows. If these two statements God
exists and Caesar exists are united, it follows correctly that / / that Caesar
exists is true, Caesar exists; but that Caesar exists is true; therefore,
Caesar exists. That Caesar exists is true is proved as follows. That Caesar
exists is the same as that God exists; but that God exists is true; therefore
T H E E M M E R A N TREATISE O N IMPOSSIBLE POSITIO 223
that Caesar exists is true. Therefore, Caesar exists. And thus from a union
of statements follows a union of things.
12. S O L U T I O N
To this it is said that a union can be made in two ways. For a union can
be made [both] at the level of things and at the level of the
understanding. And in this way, from a union of statements follows the
union of things.
Moreover, a union can be made with respect to the level o f
understanding alone. And in this case a union of things does not follow
from a union of statements.
From this it is clear that the following argument is not valid: That
Caesar exists is the same as that God exists; but that God exists is true;
therefore that Caesar exists is true. For when it is said that Caesar exists is
the same as that God exists, this is understood at the level of the
understanding.
But when it is said that Caesar exists is true, this cannot be in any way
understood except at the level of both thing and understanding.
13. A QUESTION
Furthermore, it is asked whether a union of truth and falsity has to be
held. That [it should] not is proved as follows. For a statement to be true
is nothing other than for it to signify as things are in reality. For a
statement to be false is nothing other than for it to signify as things are
not in reality. And thus in the whole union [at issue] it is implied that
things are as they are in reality and that things are not as they are in
reality. But no obligation in which two contradictory opposites are
implied should be upheld. Therefore, since this [union] implies two
contradictory opposites, it should not be upheld.
NOTES
1
Reading patet for pater.
2
Omitting De Rijk's addition.
3
1 am grateful to Jenny Ashworth for help in many of the problems of translation.
PSEUDO-SCOTUS
Q U E S T I O N S O N A R I S T O T L E ' S PRIOR ANALYTICS
Q U E S T I O N X
W H E T H E R I N E V E R Y V A L I D C O N S E Q U E N C E T H E O P P O S I T E
O F T H E A N T E C E D E N T C A N B E I N F E R R E D F R O M T H E
O P P O S I T E O F T H E C O N S E Q U E N T ?
1. A R G U M E N T S
LI Arguments for the negative answer
It is argued that not, for then it would follow that one universal
affirmative [proposition] could be simply converted into [another] universal
affirmative. The consequent is false, as Aristotle says in the text,
chapter 2. The consequence is proved by arguing as follows: every A is B,
therefore, every B is A, since the opposite of the antecedent, that is: no A
is B, follows from the opposite of the consequent, that is: no B is A.
Secondly, for i f the opposite of the antecedent can be inferred from
the opposite of the consequent, this is the case only in as much as the
opposite of the consequent is incompatible with the antecedent, but [it
is] not [the case] for this reason, for the following is a valid
consequence: only the Father exists, therefore, not only the Father exists,
and nevertheless the opposite of the consequent is not incompatible with
the antecedent, but is rather the same as the antecedent.
Thirdly, for the following is a valid consequence: no man runs,
therefore someone does not run, yet nevertheless the opposite of the
antecedent cannot be inferred from the opposite of the consequent,
since it does not follow [from the premise that] everyone runs, [that]
therefore some man runs, since when one posits the case that there is
no-one except running women, then the antecedent is true and the
consequent false.1
Fourthly, i f this would suffice for the validity of a consequence, it
would follow that the following consequence would be valid: you are [a
225
M. Yrjonsuuri (ed.), Medieval Formal Logic 225-234.
© 2001 Kluwer Academic Publishers. Printed in the Netherlands.
226 PSEUDO-SCOTUS
donkey] or you are not a donkey, therefore, you are a donkey. T h e
conclusion is false, since the antecedent of this consequence is true and
[its] consequent is false. The consequence is proved: for i f the opposite
of the consequent is given, that is, [it's] not [that] you are a donkey,
then one can infer, therefore, [it's] not [that] you are a donkey, or you
are not a donkey, by this rule "a disjunction of any proposition with any
other proposition can be inferred from itself." In this way the last
consequent is in contradiction with the first antecedent, for a
contradiction cannot be given in a truer way than by positing a negation
in front of the whole proposition.
1.2 Argumentfor the positive answer
Aristotle argues for the opposite in the text, chapter 2, where he proves
the conversion of the universal negative [proposition] by this
[principle].
1.3 Division of the question
In [our discussion of] the question we shall first see what is required for
the validity of a consequence. Secondly, we shall see what a consequence
[is] and how its kinds are divided. Thirdly, [we shall answer] the question
and fourthly we shall add certain other rules.
2. W H A T IS REQUIRED F O R T H E V A L I D I T Y OF A C O N S E Q U E N C E
About the first [article], one must know that there are three ways o f
describing [the requirements for the validity of a consequence].
The first way is [to say] that for the validity of a consequence it is
necessary and sufficient that it be impossible that the antecedent is true
and the consequent false.
The second way is to say that for the validity of a consequence it is
necessary and sufficient that it be impossible that the case is as is
signified by the antecedent without the case being as is signified by the
consequent.
The third way is [to say] that for the validity of a consequence it is
necessary and sufficient that it be impossible that when the antecedent
and the consequent are formed simultaneously, the antecedent is true and
the consequent false.
QUESTION X 227
Against the first [way], one argues that the following consequence is
valid: every proposition is affirmative, therefore, no proposition is
negative, and nevertheless it is possible that the antecedent is true, and it
is impossible that the consequent is true, and so, that [principle] is not
sufficient for [explaining] the validity of a consequence. That this
[consequence] is valid is proved: for the opposite of the antecedent can
be inferred from the opposite of the consequent, since i f some
proposition is negative, it follows that not every proposition is
affirmative, which is the opposite of the antecedent. A n d that the
antecedent can be true is obvious through [considering the case of] the
destruction of all negative propositions. But that the consequent cannot
be true, is proved: for the consequent is a negative proposition,
therefore, whenever it exists, it is false, yet nevertheless, it cannot be
true except when it exists, therefore it follows that it can never be true.
Against the second way, one argues by assuming that for the truth of a
negative proposition it is not required that something is the case, but it
suffices that it is not the case as would be signified by the affirmative
[proposition] contradictory to it, i f it existed. Then i f that [principle]
sufficed for [explaining] the validity of a consequence, the following
consequence would be valid: no chimera is a goat-stag, therefore, a man
is a donkey, which is false, for the antecedent is true and the consequent
false. For it is impossible that [things] be as is signified by the antecedent
without their being as is signified by the consequent. And this suffices in
itself (per se) for the validity of a consequence, therefore, the said
consequence was valid.
Against the third way, one argues by proving that this does not suffice
for the validity of a consequence, because some consequences can be
formed whose antecedent and consequent are both necessary, yet
nevertheless the consequence is not valid, and so, this [principle] does
not suffice for [explaining] the validity of a consequence. T h e
consequence holds, for where both the antecedent and the consequent are
necessary, it is impossible that when the antecedent and the consequent
are formed simultaneously, the antecedent is true and the consequent
false, for the consequent cannot be false when it is necessary. One
proves the antecedent by [considering] this [consequence]: God exists,
therefore, this consequence is not valid (with reference to [the
consequence] itself). It is certain that this consequence is not valid, for
[if] it were possible for it to be valid, then the consequent would be false
and the antecedent true in a valid consequence. And it is known that the
228 PSEUDO-SCOTUS
antecedent is necessary. But I prove that the consequent is necessary:
For it is impossible for the said consequence to be valid, therefore, it is
necessary that [things] are howsoever is signified by the consequent,
because the consequent does not signify anything except that this
consequence is not valid. A n d this is by the material signification of the
terms, and by the formal signification it signifies that it is true that this
consequence is not valid. So according to both significations the
consequent is necessary.
Therefore, I describe in a final way what is necessary and sufficient for
the validity of a consequence. That is: it be impossible that when the
antecedent and the consequent are formed simultaneously, the
antecedent is true and the consequent false, except in one case, namely
when the signification of the consequent is incompatible with the
signification of the sign of consequence, for example, of a conjunction
which means that the consequence obtains, as [was the case] in the
preceding argument. Thus, in the above mentioned consequence this
word 'therefore' means that the consequence is valid. This reference or
signification is incompatible with what is signified by the consequent.
Therefore it does not follow that in this case the consequence is valid.
And this is [enough] about the first [article].
2. W H A T A C O N S E Q U E N C E IS A N D H O W ITS KINDS A R E DIVIDED
About the second [article] one must note that a consequence is a
hypothetical proposition composed of an antecedent and a consequent
connected by a conditional or argumentative conjunction, which means
that it is impossible that when these (that is: the antecedent and the
consequent) are formed simultaneously, the antecedent is true and the
consequent false, and thus i f [things] are as this conjunction means, then
the consequence is valid, and i f not, then the consequence does not hold.
And note that I say: "the antecedent is true," and one must not say that
the antecedent can be true, for in the above mentioned consequence:2
every proposition is affirmative, therefore, no [proposition] is negative,
when the antecedent and the consequent are formed simultaneously, the
antecedent can be true and the consequent cannot be true, but
nevertheless it is impossible that when the antecedent and the
consequent are formed simultaneously, the antecedent is true and the
consequent false, since the consequent is always incompatible with the
QUESTION X 229
antecedent, and therefore, when the consequent exists, the antecedent is
always false.
Secondly, one must note that consequences are divided as follows:
some are material, some formal. A formal consequence is one which
holds for all terms, when the disposition and form of the terms remains
the same. And in the foregoing, we call 'terms' the subjects and the
predicates of propositions, or parts of the subject and the predicate.
Relevant to the form of the consequence are all the syncategorematic
[elements] posited in the consequence, like conjunctions, signs o f
universality or particularity, negations and suchlike. Secondly, relevant
to the form of the consequence is the copula of the proposition, and
thus the form of a consequence [composed] of propositions whose
copula is non-modal is not the same as that of one [composed] o f
propositions whose copula is modal. Thirdly, relevant to the form is the
number of premises, and affirmation and negation of propositions, and
suchlike, and thus the form of arguing from affirmative [propositions] is
not the same that of arguing from negative [propositions], and so also
for other cases.
Formal consequences are further divided, for there are some whose
antecedent is a categorical proposition, for example, conversion,
equivalence, and so on. Others are such that their antecedent is a
compound proposition. A n d each of these kinds can be further divided
into several other kinds.
Material consequences are those which do not hold for all terms, when
kept in the same disposition and form so that there is no change except
for the terms. A n d there are two kinds of them, for some are true
unconditionally and some are true for now. Consequences are true
unconditionally i f they can be reduced to a formal [consequence] by
assuming a necessary proposition. A n d so the following is an
unconditionally valid material consequence: a man runs, therefore, an
animal runs, for it can be reduced to a formal [consequence] by [adding]
the following necessary [proposition]: every man is an animal. A n d
these are further divided into many kinds according to the variety of
dialectical topics.4
But a material consequence is valid for now i f it can be reduced to a
formal consequence by assuming some contingently true proposition.
And thus given that Socrates is white, the following consequence is valid
for now: Socrates runs, therefore a white [thing] runs, for it can be
reduced to a formal [consequence] by [adding] the following [true]
contingent [proposition]: Socrates is white. It is clear, therefore, what a
230 PSEUDO-SCOTUS
consequence is and what are its kinds, and this [suffices] about the second
[article].
3. A N S W E R TO T H E QUESTION
A s for the third [article], we present [some] conclusions.
The first [conclusion] is that when a consequent follows from an
antecedent, the contrary opposite of the antecedent need not follow
from the contrary opposite of the consequent, and i f it does follow, this
nevertheless does not suffice for the validity of the consequence. Proof
of the first part: for it follows [from the premise that] no animal is a
man, [that] therefore, no man is an animal, and nevertheless in the
argument from the contrary of the consequent to the contrary of the
antecedent, the consequence is not valid, for it does not follow [from the
premise that] every man is an animal, [that] therefore, every animal is a
man. A n d by the same [argument] we prove the second part, since it
does not follow from the fact that the contrary of the antecedent
follows from the contrary of the consequent, that this consequence
would be valid.
The second conclusion is that in every valid consequence the
contradictory opposite of the antecedent follows from the contradictory
opposite of the consequent. Proof: by the definition of valid
consequence. Let A be the antecedent and B the consequent. Then by the
definition it follows that when A and B are formed simultaneously, it is
impossible that A is true and the consequent false, and so, it is impossible
that the contradictory of the consequent is true and the contradictory o f
the antecedent is false. Therefore, by the definition of consequence, the
contradictory of the consequent will be antecedent to the contradictory
of the consequent. A n d [so] we have the conclusion.
The third conclusion is that when a consequent follows from an
antecedent, the opposite of the consequent is incompatible with the
antecedent. Proof: since the opposite of the consequent cannot stand as
true with the antecedent, therefore, it is incompatible with it. T h e
consequence holds by the nominal definition of incompatibility, and the
antecedent is obvious, for the opposite of the consequent implies the
opposite of the antecedent by the previous rule. Therefore, since the
opposite of the antecedent is incompatible with [the antecedent], it
follows also that the opposite of the consequent is incompatible with it,
although not in the same way.
QUESTION X 231
It is clear, therefore, how the opposite of the antecedent is inferred
from the opposite of the consequent, and this [suffices] about the third
[article].
4. CERTAIN OTHER R U L E S
As for the fourth [article], the first conclusion is that from any
proposition which formally implies a contradiction, any other
proposition follows by a formal consequence. For example, a man is a
donkey, a stick is broken, or anything at all, follows from this: Socrates
exists and Socrates does not exist, which formally implies a
contradiction. Proof: for it follows [from the proposition that] Socrates
exists and Socrates does not exist, [that] therefore Socrates does not
exist, for the consequence from a conjunction to one of its parts is
formal. Then this consequent is retained, and further, it follows [from
the proposition that] Socrates exists and Socrates does not exist, [that]
therefore, Socrates exists, by the same rule. And [from the proposition
that] Socrates exists, it follows [that] therefore, Socrates exists or a man
is a donkey. For from any proposition we can formally infer itself
together with any other [proposition] in a disjunctive [proposition].
Then it is argued from the consequent: Socrates exists or a man is a
donkey, but Socrates does not exist, as was [inferred and] retained earlier,
[that] therefore, a man is a donkey. And just as has been argued about
this [proposition], so we can argue about any other [proposition], for all
these consequences are formal.
The second conclusion is that from any impossible proposition
follows any other proposition, not by a formal consequence, but by an
unconditionally valid material consequence. Proof: for such a
consequence is unconditionally valid, and can be reduced to a formal
consequence by assuming only a necessary proposition. But the
consequence by which one infers another proposition, whatever it is,
from an impossible [proposition] can be reduced to a formal consequence
by assuming a necessary proposition. Therefore, such a consequence is
unconditionally valid. The major [premise] is clear by the definition o f
an unconditionally5
valid [consequence]. The minor [premise] is proved
by reducing such a consequence to a formal consequence by assuming the
contradictory of the impossible proposition, for its contradictory is
necessary. For example, we say that from this: a man is a donkey, any
other proposition follows by an unconditionally6
valid consequence, as,
for example, from [the premise that] a man is a donkey, it follows that
232 PSEUDO-SCOTUS
therefore, you are in Rome. For i f we take the contradictory of the
antecedent, then it follows [from the premises that] no man is a donkey
and a man is a donkey, [that] therefore, no man is a donkey. Similarly,
it follows [that] therefore, a man is a donkey (from a conjunction to
each of its parts). Similarly, it follows [from the proposition that] a
man is a donkey, [that] therefore, a man is a donkey or you are in
Rome. But no man is a donkey (as has already been shown), therefore,
you are in Rome, and we have what we aimed at. And just as was argued
about this [proposition], so it is possible to argue about any other
[proposition].
The third conclusion [is] that a necessary proposition follows from
* "7 «
any proposition by an unconditionally valid consequence, with the
exception of the case mentioned earlier, where the signification of the
consequent is incompatible with the signification of the sign o f
consequence. The conclusion is proved [by noting that when] the
consequent follows from the antecedent, the opposite of the antecedent
follows from the opposite of consequent; but since any other
proposition follows from an impossible proposition, therefore, the
contradictory of an impossible proposition follows from the
contradictory of any proposition. A n d since any proposition is the
contradictory o f some [other], it follows that the contradictory of an
impossible proposition follows from any proposition, and since the
former is necessary, it follows that a necessary [proposition] follows
from any proposition, and we have what we aimed at.
The fourth conclusion is that from any false proposition any other
proposition follows by a material consequence valid for now. Proof:
[recall that] a material consequence is valid for now i f it can be reduced
to a formal [consequence] by assuming a [true] contingent proposition;
but that consequence by which from a false proposition another
[proposition] follows, whatever it is, can be reduced to a formal
[consequence] by assuming a true contingent proposition, therefore, etc.
The major [premise] is clear by the definition of a material consequence
valid for now, and the minor [premise] is proved by an example. Given
that Socrates is seated, I say that from the [proposition]: Socrates
moves, any other proposition follows by a material consequence valid
for now, for by the contradictory of this [proposition]: Socrates moves,
which is true, the consequence at issue can be reduced to a formal
[consequence] by taking the following conjunction: Socrates moves and
Socrates does not move, from which each of its parts follows formally,
and proceeding as we did above.
QUESTION X 233
The fifth conclusion [is] that every true proposition follows from any
other proposition in a material consequence valid for now. Proof: for
when a consequent follows from an antecedent, the opposite of the
antecedent follows from the opposite o f the consequent; but from any
false proposition any other proposition follows by a consequence valid
for now; therefore, from the contradictory of any proposition there
follows the contradictory of a false proposition. But the contradictory
of a false proposition is true, therefore,8
any true [proposition] follows
from any other proposition, and we have what we aimed at. It is clear,
therefore, how from an impossible proposition anything follows
formally in some cases, and in other [cases] only materially, namely
when the impossible [proposition] does not formally imply a
contradiction.
5. A N S W E R S TO T H E A R G U M E N T S FOR T H E NEGATFVE A N S W E R 9
Now to the arguments. To the first I say that [the rule] must be
understood [to apply] to contradictory opposites, and not to contrary
opposites.
To the second [argument]: I concede that "[this is the case only in as
much] as the opposite of the consequent is incompatible with the
antecedent," and say that the following: only the Father exists, is
incompatible with itself, for it implies a contradiction, as it follows
[from the premise that] not only the Father exists, [that] therefore, the
Father exists, and nothing else than the Father exists, and from [the
proposition that] the Father exists, it follows that the Son exists.
Therefore, the said proposition is incompatible with itself.
To the third [argument]: I concede the first consequence and say that
the opposite of the antecedent can be inferred from the opposite of the
consequent. But because the term one is common to both genders, one
ought not to infer [from the premise that] everyone runs, [that]
therefore some man*0
runs, but one ought to infer an indefinite
[proposition] without the sign [of quantity], as follows: everyone runs,
therefore, [somejone runs. And i f the sign [of quantity] is added, then it
must be taken in disjunction, with the masculine ending and with the
feminine ending as follows: everyone runs, therefore, some man (quidam)
or some woman (quaedam)1 1
runs.
To the fourth [argument]: the consequence is denied. To the first
[step], I admit that from the opposite of the consequent one can infer
the following disjunction: [It's] not [that] you are a donkey, or you are
234 PSEUDO-SCOTUS
not a donkey, but then this disjunction must be distinguished in
accordance with the fallacy of composition and division, for this
negation not, which precedes the whole disjunction, may affect only the
first part of the disjunction, and this is the divided sense, [in which case
the proposition] is a disjunction, for it follows from the opposite of the
above mentioned consequent. But i f it is taken in the composite sense,
then the negation not affects the [whole] disjunction and not [only] one
part of the disjunction. And in this way [the proposition] is not a
disjunction, but rather a conjuction, since it is equivalent to a compound
conjunction, and in this way it does not follow from the opposite of the
said consequent.
And so we have answered the [original] question.
NOTES
I
The argument is based on playing with feminine and masculine endings. In Latin,
omnis ('every') is a shared form of both masculine and feminine, while quidam
('some') is a specifically masculine determiner. The author takes it that the word
homo ('man') can be used for both men and women, but with a masculine
determiner it will refer only to men, and with a feminine one it will refer only to
women. In attempting to render the effect in English, 'one' has been used for the
gender-neutral sense of homo, 'man' for its use with quidam, Cf. below, p. 11.
Reading consequentia for propositione.
3
Reading^a/sw/n for verum.
4
Cf., e.g. Aristotle's Topics.
5
Reading simpliciter for simplicis, et.
6
Reading simpliciter for simplici.
7
Reading simpliciter for simplici.
8
Here we omit a repetitive and redundant phrase: "the contradictory of any false
proposition follows from any proposition. And since any true proposition is the
contradictory of some false [proposition], it follows that".
9
That is, to the initial arguments on pp. 1-2.
10
Quidam ('some') is masculine. Cf. footnote 1.
II
Quidam ('some') is masculine and quaedam ('some') is feminine. Cf. footnote 1.
1 2
1 am grateful to Stephen Read for help in many of the problems of translation.
I N D E X O F N A M E S
Abaelard 64-68, 88, 89, 91, 93, 153
Adams, Marilyn 137, 144
Albert the Great 7, 11, 27, 28, 30
Albert of Saxony 23, 30, 133, 136,
144, 154, 158, 186, 188-189,
193-195
Alchourron, C. E. 43, 52, 60, 61
Andersson, A. R, 194-195
Angelelli, Ignacio 30
Aristotle viii-ix, 3-8, 10-11, 21,
24-25, 27, 30, 63, 64-66, 73, 88,
90, 118-119, 127, 129, 135, 136,
137, 176, 184, 217, 225, 234
Ashworth, Jennifer 29, 30-31, 61,
113, 154-156, 179-180,
194-195, 215, 223
Augustine 88
Back, Alan 194-195
Belnap, N . D. 194-195
Bendiek, J. 184, 195
Billingham, Richard 136, 155
Boethius, A. M . S. 6, 27, 64-66,
72, 88, 93, 118, 137
Boethius de Dacia7-ll, 27, 28, 31,
163-164
Boh, Ivan xi, xii, 137, 142, 144,
180, 184, 194-195
Bolzano, Bernard 141, 144
Bos, E. P. 144
Braakhuis, H. A. G. 6, 28, 30, 31
Bradwardine, Thomas 96, 121-122,
136, 140, 154-155 186
Brandom, Robert 142, 144
Broadie, Alexander 180
Brown, M . A. 30, 31
Brunschwig, J. 27, 31
Burge, Tyler 81, 92, 93
Buridan, John xi, 64, 73-74, 111,
117, 119, 121-122, 124-125,
127, 129-131, 133-134, 136,
138-143, 147-154, 158, 171,
179-180, 186, 189, 193-194
Burley, Walter viii-ix, 5, 12-24, 26,
28-29, 31, 35-43, 45^16, 48,
50-54, 57-61, 68, 117, 119-121,
126-127, 136, 138-139, 141,
143, 158, 164
Carroll, Lewis 137, 144
Chisholm, R. M . 72
Cicero, Marcus Tullius 88
Clarembald of Arras 65, 72, 88, 93
Corcoran, John 136, 144
Courtenay, William 30, 31
Cresswell, M . 194
Curry H. B. 190, 192
De Rijk, L M . xii, 6, 7, 27, 28, 30,
31, 64, 87, 88-91, 93, 111, 113,
215
Descartes, Rene xi, 157, 180
Domingo de Soto 147, 172-179,
181
D'Ors, Angel 28, 29, 31-32, 175,
179-180
Drange, W. 195
Dummett, Michael 137, 144
Duns Scotus, John ix, xii, 25, 27,
30, 32, 76, 184, 194
Eclif(?), Iohannes 99, 102-103, 110,
111, 112
Emden, A. B. 184, 195
Etchemendy, John 141, 144
Eudemus 64-66, 68
Ferrybridge, Richard 136, 143
Fland, Robert 23, 128, 136, 143,
155
Gaetamis ofThiene 155
Gal, Gedeon 184, 195
Garlandus Compotista 65, 88, 93
Geach, P. T. 195
Gellius, Aulus 88
Genzen, Gerhardt 117, 136, 139, 144
Gilbert of Poitiers 65
Godefroid de Fontaines 27, 32
Goodman, Nelson 72
235
M. Yrjonsuuri (ed.), Medieval Formal Logic 235-237.
© 2001 Kluwer Academic Publishers. Printed in the Netherlands.
236 INDEX OF N A M E S
Greco, Anna 142
Green, Romuald 12, 16, 28, 29, 32
Green-Pedersen, N . J. 27, 32, 132,
136, 138, 140-141, 144-145
Gregory of Rimini 184
Grelling81
Gardenfors 43-45, 49, 60, 61
Godel, Kurt 74, 191-192
Haack, Susan 137, 145
Hallamaa, Olli 30
Hansen, Kaj B0rge 61
Hansson, S. O. 60, 61
Harper, W. L. 89, 93
Henry of Ghent 27, 32
Heytesbury, William x, 29, 32,
98-100, 102-106, 109-110, 112,
113
Hopton, Henry 155
Hughes, George 74, 90, 93, 111,
113, 186, 189, 194-195
Jackson, Frank 137, 145
Jacobi, Klaus 180
Jacques of Vitry 67-89, 93
Jaskowski, Stanislaw 117, 136, 145
Jean of Celaya 194
John of Cornwall xii, 184, 194
John of Holland 23, 32
John of St Germain 184
Kakkuri-Knuuttila, M.-L. 27, 32
Kaplan, David 142
Karger, Elizabeth 139, 142
Kilvington, Richard viii-ix, 12,
16-20, 22, 26-27, 29, 32, 52, 89,
154
King, Peter x-xi, 30, 32, 137, 140,
145, 149,180
Kleene, S. C. 194-195
Kneale, Martha 137, 145, 194-195
Kneale, William 137, 145, 194-195
Kneepkens, C. H. 30, 32
Knuuttila, Simo 27, 28, 29, 30,
32-33, 61, 113, 163, 181
Kretzmann, N . 29, 33, 58, 59, 61
Kripke, Saul 63, 88, 93
Lagerhmd, Henrik viii-ix, 52, 61
Lavenham, Richard 23, 121, 128,
136, 144, 156
Lear, Jonathan 136, 145
Lewis, David 49
Lindenbaum 72
Lindstrom, Sten 61
Lob, M . H. 192, 195
MacCall, Storrs 137, 145
Mackie, J. L. 72
Maiera, Alfonso 181
Makinson, David 43, 52, 60, 61
Marsilius of Inghen 23, 136
Martin, Christopher J. x, 6, 33, 59,
60, 61, 88, 93, 111, 114,
194-195
Mates, Benson 194-195
McDermott, A. C. S. 194, 196
Moody, Ernest A. 136, 145, 154,
171, 181, 194, 196
Moraux, P. 27, 33
Nicholas of Paris 6
Normore, Calvin 67, 88, 89,
93,179-181
Nute, Donald 145
Ockham, William xi, 28, 30, 33,
117, 119, 121, 125-127, 132,
135-138, 140-141, 143, 147,
154, 158, 179, 186
Olsson, Erik J. viii-ix
Panaccio, Claude 194, 196
Paul of Pergula 23, 33, 155, 163,
181
Paul of Venice 23, 33, 61, 154-155
Pearce, G. 89, 93
Perreiah, Alan 27, 30, 33
Peter of Mantua 147, 155, 165-169,
174, 181
Pinborg, Jan 139
Pironet, Fabienne x, 111, 113, 114
Pluta, Olaf 181
Pozzi, Lorenzo 30, 33, 145, 181,
194, 196
Prawitz, Dag 136, 145
Priest, G. 189, 195-196
Prior,Arthur N. 141, 145, 186, 196
Pseudo-Ockham 143
Pseudo-Scotus xii, 121, 138-139,
143, 154, 184-185, 187-190,
193-194, 196
I N D E X OF N A M E S 237
Ramsey, F. P. 49-51, 60, 62, 72
Read, Stephen xii, 97, 114,
180-181, 194, 196, 234
Richard of Campsall 29, 33
Richter, Vladimir 28, 33
Rosetus, Roger 23, 30
Rosser, J. B. 191-192, 194, 196
Roure, M . L. I l l , 114, 186, 194,
196
Routley, R. 189, 195-196
Russell, Bertrand 73
Ryle, Gilbert 27, 33
Seaton, Wallace 181
Segerberg, Krister 61
Schupp, Franz 141, 145
Scott, T. K. 114, 186, 196
Sermoneta, Alexander 155, 171
Shapiro, Stewart 141-142, 145
Smiley, Timothy 136, 145
Smith, Robin 136, 145
Sobel, J. H. 60, 62
Sorensen, R. 195-196
Spade, Paul, 19-20, 23, 28-30, 33,
35, 42, 47^18, 50-52, 58-62,
68-70, 88, 89, 92, 93, 111, 113,
114, 154-156, 179, 194, 196
Stalnaker, R. 60, 62, 89, 93
Strode, Ralph 125, 136, 144, 147,
154-155, 158-166, 168,
171-172, 174, 181, 186
Stump, Eleonore 28, 29, 30, 33, 34,
58, 59, 61, 62, 68-69, 89, 90,
93, 111, 114, 141, 145
Swineshed, Roger viii-ix, 12,
20-24, 26-27, 29, 30, 52
Tarski, Alfred 129-130, 132, 135,
140-141, 145, 186, 194, 196
Taschek, William 142
Thierry of Chartres 65, 88, 93
Thorn, Paul 136, 145
Von Wright, G. H. 28, 34
Weisheipl, James A. 27, 34
William Buser of Heusden 23
William of Sherwood 28, 68, 76, 90
William of Ware 156
Wodeham, Adam 184
Woods, Michael 137, 145
Wyclif, John 111
Yagisawa, Takashi 89, 94
Yrjonsuuri, Mikko viii-ix, xii,
27-30, 34, 58-62, 142, 163-164,
181
Zeno of Elea 68
Aqvist, Lennart 61