Springer
Aristotle's "Topics" and Medieval Obligational Disputations
Author(s): M i k k o Yrjonsuuri
Source: Synthese, J u l . , 1993, Vol. 96, No. 1, Studies i n Early Fourteenth-Century
Philosophy (Jul., 1993), pp. 59-82
Published by: Springer
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/20117799
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms
Springer is collaborating with TSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Synthese
JSTOR
This content downloaded from
147.251.94.99 on Mon, 07 Feb 2022 15:12:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
M I K K O Y R J O N S U U R I
A R I S T O T L E ' S TOPICS A N D M E D I E V A L
OB L I G A T I O N A L D I S P U T A T I O N S *
Although early medieval logic was essentially based on Aristotle's
works, many branches of the so-called logica moderna, which has emerged
since the late twelfth century, have quite remote roots in the
Organon, the collection of Aristotle's logical works. My interest in this
paper is primarily directed to the genre of the logica moderna called
obligationes. Treatises of this genre discussed special kinds of disputations
based on obligations or duties of a certain kind. This theory
developed with the logica moderna in the thirteenth and especially in
the fourteenth centuries. As it stands, it looks rather peculiar, and
accordingly modern scholars have found it difficult to link it with the
rest of the logica moderna in an organic way. Connections to Aristotle
have often been thought to be even more remote, perhaps to be found
only on the level of Aristotle's particular phrases.
My purpose in this paper is to show how the theory of obligations
can be put into the context of Aristotelian theory of disputation, as it
was understood in the Middle Ages. As I see it, what is known as the
theory of obligations is a natural and interesting development of some
new ideas within the context of Aristotelian theory of dialectical disputations,
as presented in the Topics. It even seems reasonable to suppose
that the theory evolved from medieval interpretations of the Topics.
1. A R I S T O T L E ' S TOPICS
At the beginning of the Topics Aristotle describes the purpose of the
treatise as follows:1
Our treatise proposes to find a line of inquiry whereby we shall be able to reason from
reputable opinions about any subject presented to us, and also shall ourselves, when
putting forward an argument, avoid saying anything contrary to it.
The method discussed in the Topics is thus concerned with reasoning
based on reputable opinions (or 'endoxa\ whatever that is taken to
mean). As it becomes clear some lines later, Aristotle means by dialectical
reasoning (dialectical syllogism) valid reasoning with reputable
Synthese 96: 59-82, 1993.
© 1993 Kluwer Academic Publishers. Printed in the Netherlands.
This content downloaded from
147.251.94.99 on Mon, 07 Feb 2022 15:12:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
60 M I K K O Y R J O N S U U R I
premises. The difference from demonstration lies in the status of the
premises, not in the validity of the reasoning. For my purposes here
the status of the premises is not, however, particularly interesting. What
is interesting - and perhaps less recognized - is the fact that the account
of the purpose contains both the active role of reasoning and the passive
role of defending an argument in a consistent way. Later in the treatise
it becomes clear that dialectical reasoning is discussed as taking place
in a disputation with two debaters in different roles.
The disputational context is brought to attention particularly in Topics
VIII. Modern scholars have noticed that Aristotle's discussions here
can be read as formulating rules for a specific dialectical game.2
These
rules describe quite clearly the practical side of a dialectical disputation;
they tell how the arguments are to be put forward and how they are
to be evaluated. The process can be modernized into a question-answer
game with two players: one asking the questions and the other answering
them. In addition to the two players, Aristotle seems to assume
that there is a judge, who may be either an authorized person or simply
the audience.
Dialectical disputations are treated from three different points of view
in Topics VIII: Chapters 1-3 discuss the strategies of the questioner,
Chapters 4-10 discuss the rules for answering the questions, and Chapters
11-13 pertain to criticism of the discussion as a whole - they
represent the viewpoint of the judge. Chapter 14 concludes the book.
When turning to the role of the answerer in Book VIII 4, Aristotle
summarizes the purposes of the two players as follows:3
With regard to the giving of answers, we must first define what is the business of a good
answerer, as of a good questioner. The business of the questioner is so to develop the
argument as to make the answerer utter the most implausible of the necessary consequences
of his thesis; while that of the answerer is to make it appear that it is not he
who is responsible for the impossibility or paradox, but only his thesis; for one may, no
doubt, distinguish between the mistake of taking up a wrong thesis to start with, and
that of not maintaining it properly, when once taken up.
This passage describes nicely what is at issue in the dialectical game
that emerges from the discussions in Book VIII. There is a thesis
attacked by one of the participants - call him the questioner - and
defended by the other participant - call him the answerer. The questioner
tries to lead the answerer to admit something that is impossible,
or specifically to admit the contradiction of his thesis; the answerer
This content downloaded from
147.251.94.99 on Mon, 07 Feb 2022 15:12:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
A R I S T O T L E ' S TOPICS 61
tries to avoid impossibilities, and if he cannot, he should show that the
impossibility was already implicitly present in the defended thesis.
As we know from Socrates, discussions of this kind were well known
to Aristotle's Greek audience. However, Aristotle claims that he is the
first to develop rules for non-competitive dialectical disputations, for
the purposes of examination and inquiry.4
Regardless of whether Aristotle
is right, the remark about the non-competitive character of disputations
for philosophical inquiry is interesting. Even if the goals of the
questioner and answerer are also partially opposed in the truth-seeking
disputation described by Aristotle, they are both working for a joint
external goal. One cannot properly distinguish who has won a truthseeking
disputation, since both the questioner and the answerer are
working to achieve the most interesting refutation of the thesis discussed.
As for the results of the discussion, the interest is mainly in
whether and how the thesis has been refuted - not in who has won.5
2. E A R L Y M E D I E V A L T H E O R Y OF D I S P U T A T I O N
As my purpose here is not to interpret Aristotle's theory, let me now
turn to medieval reception of this theory of dialectical reasoning. Unfortunately,
the dialectical game sketched in Book VIII of the Topics is
not much discussed in medieval works on topics. Boethius's influential
late ancient works on topics6
concentrate on the places (topoi, loci) of
arguments discussed in Books II-VII of Aristotle's Topics, and later
medieval authors seem to follow him. The topoi of arguments are
much discussed in medieval logic, but usually without treatment of
disputational context. It seems that the interpretation of Aristotle's
dialectical topoi went in a direction different from the interpretation of
the dialectical game.7
It is well known that disputations formed an integral part of medieval
scholastic education. Throughout the Middle Ages disputational practice
played a central role both in teaching and as a technique of argumentation.
One must bear in mind that, just as with Aristotle, medieval
authors' use of the theory of disputation must be looked at as a theory
of legitimate debate in medieval academic circles.
According to early medieval accounts, disputation consists of three
parts: positio, oppositio, and responsio. Positio is the thesis disputed,
oppositio is an argumentation presented against the positio, and responsio
is the response given to the oppositio. The parts of the oppositio
This content downloaded from
147.251.94.99 on Mon, 07 Feb 2022 15:12:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
62 M I K K O Y R J O N S U U R I
are propositio, interrogatio, and conclusio, while the parts of the responsio
are concessio, contradictio, and prohibitio. This structure of disputation
is similar to the Aristotelian structure discussed above. The opponent
attacks the thesis (positio) through questions (interrogatio), and
he is allowed to make inferences (conclusio) from what the respondent
grants (concessio). The respondent does not have to grant whatever
the opponent wishes: he can deny (contradictio) or even suspend the
question (prohibitio). The two participants of the disputation have thus
their specific roles; disputation is not conceived in an informal everyday
manner, but as a rule-governed technical activity.8
The specific roles of the opponent and the respondent are developed
further in Boethius de Dacia's questions, written in Paris between 1270
and 1276, of Aristotle's Topics.9
Boethius feels compelled to question
whether dialectics can be called one science, for it teaches such different
things as the roles of the opponent and the respondent. (The answer
is naturally affirmative: these two roles belong to the same mode of
dialectical argumentation.)10
Boethius follows Aristotle in discussing, first, the role of the opponent
and, then, the role of the respondent. In the first chapter of Topics VIII,
Aristotle discusses different methods that the opponent can employ to
conceal how the conclusion will be achieved. As Aristotle points out,
such techniques "serve a contentious purpose; but inasmuch as an
undertaking of this sort is always conducted against another person, we
are obliged to employ them as well".1 1
It seems that Aristotle feels
forced to admit some competitive elements into his generally co-operative
theory of dialectic disputation. The two participants play, after all,
opposite roles in the game-like disputation he describes.12
L. M . de Rijk has edited an interesting group of medieval treatises,
De modo opponendi et respondendi, where this advice is understood in
a very straightforward way and discussed as methods of winning a
disputation by fair means, or foul. It is clear that these treatises do not
intend to discuss co-operative disputations; rather, their subject is the
sophistical disputation where winning is the main goal.1 3
Boethius de Dacia takes for granted that dialectical disputation only
serves the co-operative purposes of exercise and inquiry into truth.1 4
If the opponent aims at defeating the respondent, the disputation cannot
be called dialectical; it should be called sophistical.15
From this
approach it quite naturally follows that Boethius is led to ask whether
the dialectical opponent should really follow Aristotle's advice: Should
This content downloaded from
147.251.94.99 on Mon, 07 Feb 2022 15:12:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
A R I S T O T L E S TOPICS 63
the opponent argue against the respondent, develop inductive or deductive
arguments so that the respondent does not notice how the conclusion
is brought about, provoke the respondent into hatred, use
concealing phrases, etc.? Or should he help the respondent in defending
the thesis?16
Boethius answers by pointing out that even if the opponent and the
respondent have opposite internal goals in the disputation, they have
a joint external goal for the disputation. Each helps the other through
the disputation by acting against one another in the disputation. In
Boethius's own words:17
[Dialectical disputation is a joint activity, and both help each other in this activity,
although the opponent does not help the respondent in defending the thesis, since then
the joint activity would be corrupted and there would be no mutual help.
But what is this mutual help? Boethius's answer is twofold: if the
disputation is undertaken as an inquiry into truth, either a false thesis
will be shown to be mistaken or a true thesis is confirmed as reasons
against it turn out to be weak. And, if the disputation is undertaken
as an exercise, the opponent gets exercise in finding arguments and the
respondent in proper defence of a thesis.18
When considering dialectical disputation in general Boethius does
not give any clear explanation of who lays down the thesis. In the
Topics Aristotle seems to assume that it is mainly the duty of the
respondent to choose the thesis: the opponent has the duty of building
an argument opposing the thesis. From the co-operative character of
the disputation it quite naturally follows that the participants may also
choose the thesis jointly and try to find the most interesting refutation
for it together. In obligational theory the opponent is usually assumed
to choose the thesis, but the disputation can be undertaken only if the
respondent accepts it.
Now we turn to the respondent: What is the proper defence of a
thesis?
Boethius de Dacia begins his discussion of this question by considering
the character of a good respondent in a general manner. Boethius
formulates three interesting requirements:19
[1] A good respondent ought to be such that he grants to the opponent all that he would
grant for himself thinking by himself, and [such that he] denies in the same way.
[2] He ought to be inclined from his inborn nature or from acquired habit to grant truths
and to deny falsities and he ought to love truth for its own sake.
This content downloaded from
147.251.94.99 on Mon, 07 Feb 2022 15:12:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
64 M I K K O Y R J O N S U U R I
[3] Third he ought to be aware that he should not be impudent, that is keep to some
thesis for which he has no reasons and from which he cannot be turned away by any
reason. Such a person, namely, cannot come to understand the truth.
It is easy to see that no fruitful disputation can be achieved if the
respondent violates any of these three requirements. If the respondent
does not try to tell the truth, as is implied by [1] and [2], the disputation
does not have any connection to truth, and, if no reasons can effect
the views of the respondent, the disputation cannot make progress in
any interesting way.
[l]-[3] can be seen as basic dialectical duties. Boethius's discussion
of the role of the respondent in dialectical disputation focuses on these
duties, and - as I try to show in the following - even the whole tradition
of obligations can be seen as development of these duties. In order to
handle the duties more conveniently in the following, it seems fitting
to find their formal analogues.
As a first step toward the formal analogues, let us join [1] and [2].
Their common implication seems to be very near to stating that, if the
respondent knows something to be true, he should also grant it to the
opponent. This duty can be found explicitly mentioned in some texts
of obligational theory,20
and, following these texts, it also seems proper
to include also duties pertaining to two other answers: that of denying
and that of doubting. The triple duty of following truth can then be
given the following formal presentation:21
(Ta is read: for any proposition p, which is put forward in a disputation,
if a, the respondent, knows that p, it is obligatory that he grants it to
his opponent b. N stands for denying and D for expressing doubt.) As
we shall soon see, these general duties must be characterized as prima
facie duties, since they are occasionally overridden by other duties in
special contexts.
The idea behind Boethius's requirement [3] seems to be, semi-formally,
that if the respondent defends p, accepting q and D(q > ~ip)
(to be read: q entails —\p) should have an adverse effect on his defence.
Accepting reasons for the opposite of the thesis ought to make the
respondent abandon the thesis. With obligational theory in mind, it
seems appropriate to generalize: the respondent ought to grant what
(Ta)
(Tb )
(Tc )
(p)(Ka > OCabp).
(p)(Ka^p>ONabp).
(p)(^Kap & ^Ka~ip > ODabp).
This content downloaded from
147.251.94.99 on Mon, 07 Feb 2022 15:12:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
A R I S T O T L E ' S TOPICS 65
he knows to be entailed by what he has already granted. One way of
formalizing such a duty is the following:
(E) (p)(q)(Gabp &Kan(p>q)>OCabq).
(l
Gab stands for l
a has granted for b\)
The application of these duties becomes clearer when Boethius discusses
Aristotle's distinction between two kinds of respondent's mistakes:
that of taking up a wrong thesis, and that of not properly maintaining
a thesis, once taken up. Aristotle seems to think that if one
tries to defend something implausible, one most probably loses the
game even with good defence, while a plausible thesis will be lost only
with weak defence. In his commentary Boethius addresses the question
which of these two mistakes is worse.
According to Boethius taking up a wrong thesis is a worse mistake,
if we correctly understand what a wrong thesis is. According to him, a
wrong thesis is one that cannot lead to any useful disputation, like, for
example, asking whether the number of stars is even or odd. Taking
up an implausible thesis is not a mistake according to Boethius, since
such a thesis may be very useful in exercise. When a suitable thesis is
taken up, not maintaining it properly is only a minor mistake, because
even so the disputation serves as an exercise, though not as well as
possible.22
Boethius's remark that one may accept an implausible thesis in disputation
for exercise is quite interesting in respect to the duty of following
truth. Boethius very clearly points out that in disputations for
exercise the duty to follow truth is not always followed. When the
respondent is defending a thesis well known to be false, he will be
forced to choose between violating the duty of answering in a consistent
way and the duty of following the truth. Boethius's advice is clear: one
must remain consistent.
The primary thing exercised in disputations for the purpose of exercise
is, according to Boethius, the ability to be consistent; that is, avoid
anything incompatible with the accepted thesis or deny anything following
from the thesis. The idea of having an exercise is a step away
from truth, it seems that Boethius presents the art of obligations (ars
obligatoria) as a step farther in this direction.
Boethius introduces the art of obligations as a special technique,
which can be employed within the context of dialectical disputations.
The discussion of the art begins as follows:23
This content downloaded from
147.251.94.99 on Mon, 07 Feb 2022 15:12:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
66 M I K K O Y R J O N S U U R I
And with this you must know, that in dialectical disputations, which are [undertaken]
for inquiry into truth, or for exercise in easy invention of arguments for whichever
proposition or in defence of the thesis, the art of obligations is often used.
The two purposes given for employing obligational technique are the
purposes Boethius also gives generally for dialectical disputations. Boethius
seems to state here that any dialectical disputation may employ
this technique. However, his description of the technique shows that it
may be applied only in specific disputations. Also, how the technique
can serve the purposes of inquiry is left unclear.
3. O B L I G A T I O N A L DISPUTATIONS
Let us now look at the technique of obligations in general, then at
different versions of that technique, and finally the purposes for which
that technique is suitable.
The basic idea of the obligational technique is that in a disputation
the opponent can give the respondent a specific duty overriding the
general prima facie duty of following the truth (Ta -Tc ). Even though
a variety of duties were distinguished as different speciei of obligational
disputations, the paradigmatic type of specific duty seems to have been
that of granting a given contingently false proposition. This kind of
obligation was called positio, and the given false proposition was called
positum. In the following I will adopt the term positum without transla-
tion.
Boethius gives a short account of obligational technique as follows:24
[T]he art of obligations, which is based on this, that the opponent posits every thesis,
which he wants to posit, and the respondent must grant them, whether they are probable
or improbable, whether necessary or impossible, as far it does not happen that they are
incompossible - incompossibility is namely the only cause why the respondent has to
deny the opponent any of those, which he wants to posit - until he [the opponent] says
"time is finished", and all which have been posited before this are understood to be
granted by the respondent. Then from these, which are posited, the opponent makes
questions to the respondent, and the respondent must grant all consequents of his
thesis.... And the respondent must deny everything which is repugnant to his thesis.
It is interesting to notice that the oppponent may give propositions of
any status as positum, even impossible ones. Boethius emphasizes that
the respondent must accept all sentences, so far as they are not incompossible.
It seems that this term should be translated into modern
terminology as inconsistency: the respondent must accept all kinds of
This content downloaded from
147.251.94.99 on Mon, 07 Feb 2022 15:12:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
A R I S T O T L E ' S TOPICS 67
propositions, even (natural?) impossibilities, but he must take care that
he does not accept inconsistencies.
Boethius says that "all which have been posited before this are
understood to be granted by the respondent". The respondent must
take care that all his later answers are consistent with granting all those
propositions that are posited. Even though in accepting the positum
the respondent violates the prima facie duties formalized as T a - T c
above, he must follow E. This idea is elaborated in the last two sentences
cited above: the respondent must grant whatever follows from
the positum, and he must deny whatever is repugnant to the positum.
Boethius's description of the course of an obligational disputation is
slightly different from what is assumed in most treatises on obligations.
A suitable opposing text is Ockham's description:25
And this art consists of this that in the beginning some proposition has to be posited,
and then propositions have to be proposed as pleases the opponent, and to these the
respondent has to answer by granting or denying or doubting or distinguishing. When
these answers are given, the opponent, when it pleases him, has to say: "time is finished".
This is, the time of the obligation is finished. And then it is seen whether the respondent
has answered well or not.
There are at least two important differences between Boethius's and
Ockham's descriptions of the art of obligations. First, in both descriptions
the disputation begins with positio, but Boethius clearly thinks
that there are several posita, while Ockham uses the singular. Second,
the phrase 'time is finished' is placed differently. Boethius places it
immediately after the posita are given, while Ockham assumes that
propositions to be evaluated are put forward before this phrase.
These differences are connected. It seems natural that the phrase
'time is finished' marks the end of the set of sentences that is at the
focus of the discussion in the obligational disputation. According to
Boethius, all of these sentences are given as posita, and as such they
form a fixed set: the point of the obligational disputation is to consider
this fixed set. According to Ockham, only one sentence is given as
positum, and the set of sentences on which the disputation focuses is
not fixed. The set grows with the disputation, and - as it turns out
when rules are considered more carefully - the order in which the
propositions are brought into discussion is very important. One of the
main ideas of obligational theories similar to Ockham's theory is how
This content downloaded from
147.251.94.99 on Mon, 07 Feb 2022 15:12:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
68 M I K K O Y R J O N S U U R I
the interpretation of sentences is relativized to the order of their pre-
sentation.
Modern discussion has delineated three different theories of obligations
prevalent during the fourteenth century, while it has been assumed
that during the thirteenth century a consensus existed. However, it
seems that we must recognize Boethius's theory as different from the
standard approach, and consider two different theories of obligations
of the thirteenth century. Ignoring the differences in the setting, the
feature to best differentiate between all five theories is their rules for
evaluating and connecting to the disputation as whole propositions,
which neither follow from nor are repugnant to the positum or posita.
Such propositions are usually called irrelevant (impertinens).
Three basic rules for evaluating propositions are common to all theories
(l
Pab stands for 'a has admitted as the positum from &'):
(Rj) (p)(Pabp>OCabp).
(R2 ) (p)(q)(Pabp & KaU{p >q)> OCabq).
(R3) (p)(q)(Pabp & KaU{p > i*?) > ONabq).
Ri is simply the rule that the positum must be granted; R 2 tells that
propositions following from the positum must be granted; and R 3 tells
that repugnant propositions must be denied. Thus Rx defines the special
obligation overriding the prima facie duty of following truth, and R 2
and R 3 are specialized applications of the duty of remaining consistent.
In the following account of the different theories, I will assume these
three rules and consider different ways of expanding the set of rules so
that a single answer would be determined for any proposition put
forward during an obligational disputation.
4. D I F F E R E N T T H E O R I E S S P E C I F I C A L L Y
Boethius adds only one rule to these three: the rule for irrelevant
propositions. The rule is very simple: any irrelevant proposition must
be granted regardless of its status, even an impossible one.2 6
Formally
QIab stands for irrelevant in the disputation between a and f):
(R4 B ) (p)(hbp > OCabp).
Boethius's source for such a rule is Aristotle, who in Topics VIII 6
gives a similar one.2 7
Aristotle's rationale for this rule seems to be
that the respondent acting co-operatively will grant what the opponent
This content downloaded from
147.251.94.99 on Mon, 07 Feb 2022 15:12:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
A R I S T O T L E ' S TOPICS 69
wants, if there are no specific reasons for denying the proposition.
Granting an irrelevant proposition cannot do any harm - just because
the proposition is irrelevant.
In obligational disputation following Boethius's rules, the situation
is similar: the answer to irrelevant propositions is not important, since
those propositions are literally irrelevant. Boethius's obligational theory
is a technique of discussing the logical character of a fixed set of
propositions, and, if a proposition bears no logical relation to that set,
it cannot play any role in the discussion.
According to the description given by Boethius, the primary duty of
the respondent in an obligational disputation is to detect any hidden
inconsistencies in the set of posita. It seems that obligational disputation
of the Boethian type is primarily a tool for discussing implicitly inconsistent
descriptions of situations and paradoxical situations as the liar's
paradox.28
When we turn from Boethius's theory to other theories, from Paris
to Oxford, the attitude toward irrelevant propositions changes. It even
seems that problems with rules for irrelevant propositions became the
reason why fourteenth-century obligational treatises were written. In
the three fourteenth-century theories, we find different rules for irrelevant
propositions, but all authors reveal an interest in these rules.
The theory found in Walter Burley's treatise on obligations, written
in 1302,29
seems to have been the most popular one. As far as modern
editions represent the tradition accurately, this theory, which I will in
the following call Burley's theory, is basically a systematization of the
standard theory of the thirteenth century. Modern scholars of this genre
seem to agree that there was a period of dispute during the first half
of the fourteenth century about correct rules of obligation, but most of
Burley's theory was accepted after the dispute - albeit with important
revisions.
Burley's rules differ from Boethius's in two ways. First, while Boethius
advises the respondent to grant all irrelevant propositions, according
to Burley irrelevant propositions ought to be treated following the
general prima facie duty of following the truth. Propositions known to
be true ought to be granted, those known to be false ought to be
denied, and others ought to be doubted.30
Formally, the rules are as
follows:
(R4 a ) (p)(Iaba & KaP > OCabp).
This content downloaded from
147.251.94.99 on Mon, 07 Feb 2022 15:12:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
70 M I K K O Y R J O N S U U R I
(R4b) (PXUP &Ka^P> ONabP).
(R4 c ) (p)(Iabp &^Kap &^Ka^p> ODabp).
R4a-R4c are analogous to T a - T c , except for the condition that p is
irrelevant.
The second difference is that previously answered irrelevant propositions
must be taken into account when considering the consistency of
answers.31
This is operationalized through the following additions to
rules R 2 and R3 :
(R2 'w) (p)(q)(r)(Pabp & Gabq & KaD((p &q)>r)> OCabr).
(R3 'W ) (p){q){r)(Pabp & Gabq & KaD((p &q)> -ir) > ONabr).
According to these rules a sentence put forward should be granted if it
follows from the positum, together with any of the sentences maintained
earlier; it should be denied if it is inconsistent with the positum, together
with any of the sentences maintained earlier.
Adding these rules to R 2 and R 3 also forces revision of the definition
of irrelevancy, since a proposition should also be relevant when it
follows from the positum, together with some earlier granted proposition.
A proposition is thus irrelevant if and only if none of rules R i ,
R2 , R2'w> R3> or R 3 ' W applies to it. This definition of irrelevancy makes
it clear that Burley's rules Rx , R2 , R2<w> R3, R3W, R4a> R4t» and R 4 c
are exhaustive in the sense that these determine one and only one
answer to any proposition put forward in the disputation (assuming
that the respondent has sufficient knowledge of entailments).32
The aim in Burley's rules is to guarantee the consistency of the list
of answers. As the positum is just one sentence, Boethius's aim of
testing the consistency of posita is not at issue - even if a special
rule requiring non-paradoxicality from the positum is often given in
thirteenth-century treatises presenting rules similar to Burley's.3 3
But
just as Boethius stresses that the set of posita must be consistent, Burley
stresses that the set of answers must be consistent.34
The shift from
Boethius to Burley is one from considering a fixed set to discussion of
a set of sentences sensitive to the order of presentation.
Like Boethius's viewpoint, Burley's is strictly syntactic. Although the
list of answers is consistent, it is not in any clear sense supposed to be
a description of any situation. Early treatises on obligations, including
Burley's treatise, give a rule according to which "when a false continThis
content downloaded from
147.251.94.99 on Mon, 07 Feb 2022 15:12:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
A R I S T O T L E / S TOPICS 71
gent proposition concerning the present has been posited, one must
deny that it is the present instant".35
This rule implies that answers in an
obligational disputation are based on two instants of time: the relevant
sentences must be connected to an imagined future instant, while the
irrelevant sentences are answered on the basis of an actual present
instant. This makes the set of answers nonsensical as a whole.
An interesting revision to obligational theory is made by John Duns
Scotus, who points out that these rules concerning instants are not
essential to the art of obligations, and should be left out.3 6
In the
form cited above the rule cannot be found in later treatises. The most
important novelty in the Scotist revision is that it opens the way to
interpreting the list of answers as description of one possible situation.
Answers are no longer connected to two different instants, they are all
based on the present instant, and as a set the answers must form a
consistent description of how things could be at the present. It is,
however, noteworthy that there is no guarantee that the consistent
description is even near to truth. Burley gives a rule to the effect that
when the respondent has admitted a false positum, he may be forced
to grant any falsehood compatible with that positum. This rule is not
changed by the Scotist revision.37
Scotus's remarks on the theory of obligations in the context of an
argument about freedom of the will. He argues that even when the will
chooses something, it is possible in the very same instant that it does
not choose that thing. This argumentation has been understood as
concerning a concept of possibility very near our modern concept of
logical possibility.38
Burley's obligational theory - with the Scotist
revision - seems to suit very well the discussion of logical possibilities.
The respondent's answers based on a false positum are developed into
a consistent set, which seems to describe what can be called a logically
possible alternative of the actual present.
When referring to the theory of obligations in his Sophismata, written
in Oxford between 1321 and 1326,39
Richard Kilvington pursues this
line further: he thinks that the list of answers in an obligational disputation
should describe the situation as it would be if the positum were
true.4 0
This interpretation of what is going on in an obligational disputation
demands rules different from Boethius's or Burley's rules. The
change concerns mainly those propositions that are irrelevant according
to the definitions relying on entailment given earlier, but that are
This content downloaded from
147.251.94.99 on Mon, 07 Feb 2022 15:12:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
72 M I K K O Y R J O N S U U R I
counterfactually dependent on the positum. According to Kilvingtonian
definition, a proposition is irrelevant if and only if its truth-value would
be the same as it is now, if the positum were true.
With this new definition of irrelevant propositions Kilvington can
adopt Burley's rules R4a -R4c to regulate answers to irrelevant propositions.
Rules R 2 and R 3 must be modified by changing the entailment
into a counterfactual conditional:
(R2 K) (p)(q)(Pabp & Ka(p t^q)> OCabq).
(R3 K ) (p)(q)(Pabp & Ka(p Ch> -ig) > ONavq).
('p n-*q' ought to be read 'if it were the case that p, it would be the
case that q'.) According to these rules a sentence put forward should
be granted if it is known to be counterfactually implied by the positum,
and denied if its denial is known to be counterfactually implied by the
positum.
Kilvington and an anonymous author41
following his theory also try
to elaborate their theoretical idea through accepting R 2 and R 3 as
such, but adding the following rules, which are structurally similar to
Burley's rules R 2 W and R 3 W : 4 2
(R2 .K ) (p)(q)(r)(PabP & Kaq & KaD((p &q)>r)> OCabr).
(R3 -K) (p)(q)(r)(Pabp & Kaq & KaU((p &q)>-lr)> ONabr).
In these rules the counterfactual conditional used in R 2 K and R 3 K is
avoided. Instead a sentence should be granted if it is known to be
entailed by the positum together with known truths, and denied if its
denial is known to be entailed by the positum together with known
truths.
A similar idea of elaborating the content of a counterfactual conditional
can also be found in early modern accounts of subjunctive
reasoning. Primary problems with this kind of account are in the selection
of the additional premises: What kind of background knowledge
may be employed? Neither Kilvington nor the mentioned anonymous
author discuss this problem, thus we must take their theories as incomplete
in this respect.
It may be that the set of rules of obligations employing either R 2 K
and R 3 K or R 2 K and R 3 K can be developed into a suitable whole, but,
as matter of fact, medieval authors did not generally accept the idea of
employing counterfactual reasoning in the rules of obligations. Kilvington's
theory was not accepted because logicians felt comfortable with
This content downloaded from
147.251.94.99 on Mon, 07 Feb 2022 15:12:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
A R I S T O T L E ' S TOPICS 73
keeping to logically necessary inferences within obligational disputa-
tions.
In his theory of obligational reasoning, Roger Swineshed has a very
different approach from Kilvington's.4 3
Swineshed does not require
consistency of the list of answers as a whole. The whole list thus cannot
be taken as describing a situation. Swineshed returns in a sense to
Boethius's idea that irrelevant propositions are literally irrelevant to
the main discussion. A natural way to interpret the list of answers is
to classify it in two columns, one for relevant and the other for irrelevant
propositions. Both columns are internally consistent, but may naturally
be mutually inconsistent, since, if the positum is false, answers in the
relevant column are mostly false, whereas answers in the irrelevant
column are supposed to follow truth.
Swineshed does not present any new basic rules: his theory is sufficiently
given by leaving R 2 ' W and R 3 W out of Burley's rules. Thus, the
set of rules contains Rx , R2 , R3, R 4 a , Rib, and R4 c -4 4
Answers following
rules R1-R3 are to be put in the relevant column, while answers following
R4 a-R4c belong to the irrelevant column. When the disputation
follows Swineshed's rules, the relevant column can amount at most to
a partial description of a situation, where the positum is true. Since all
propositions granted to this column follow logically from the positum,
no new information of the situation can be found; only implicit information
can be made explicit.
Both medieval and modern discussions of Swineshed's theory of
obligations have concentrated much on two seemingly odd, specific
rules. They are as follows:45
A conjunction need not be granted on account of granting parts of the conjunction, and
neither on account of granting a disjunction has any part of it to be granted.
These rules have often been interpreted as granting flat contradictions.
In a sense, they do allow that. Swineshed himself recognizes that,
according to his theory, three or more sentences granted within the
same disputation may form an inconsistent set.46
However, if relevant
and irrelevant sentences are distinguished into different columns, it
becomes clear that neither column can include contradictions. The
irrelevant column is consistent simply because it is a description of the
actual world. The relevant column is consistent because all sentences
granted in it follow from the positum.
Swineshed's idea of structuring the obligational disputation into two
This content downloaded from
147.251.94.99 on Mon, 07 Feb 2022 15:12:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
74 M I K K O Y R J O N S U U R I
mutually inconsistent parts is not entirely new. Burley discusses a case
where the same opponent gives simultaneously two inconsistent sentences
as posita to different people. As Burley remarks, in such a
situation one may grant without answering poorly the contradiction of
the posited sentence - namely, the contradiction of the sentence posited
to the other respondent.
The seemingly odd rule for conjunctions and disjunctions also has its
predecessors. In the putative Sherwood treatise, it is noted that "it
does not follow that, if both parts [of a copulative] should be granted
divisim, that the copulative itself should be granted".47
This rule is
different from Swineshed's, as it discusses answers to propositions that
might be put forward at a certain step in the disputation, while Swineshed's
rule discusses answers to propositions that are actually put forward
at different steps in the disputation. As in Swineshed, in the
putative Sherwood rule the idea is that the copulative may consist of
an irrelevant true proposition and a sequent proposition: in that case
the whole copulative is irrelevant and false, and has to be denied, while
the parts have to be granted for separate reasons.
Richard of Campsall, in his Questiones on the Prior Analytics, also
discusses a case where the conjunction has to be denied when its parts
have to be granted. Campsall says that "this consequentia has to be
denied: 'these parts have to granted, therefore the copulative has to be
granted'".4 8
Campsall's idea is that one of the conjuncts may have to
be granted in one disputation and the other part in an other disputation,
while the conjunction may have to be denied in both disputations.
Campsall discusses a situation where two different opponents have
given at the same time two contradictory sentences as posita for the
respondent. Then the respondent would clearly have two disputations,
and contradictions between sentences occuring in different obligational
disputations are not problematic. Campsall also states that if the respondent
can be obliged to such disputations by two opponents, it is
also possible that he is obliged to such disputations by one opponent
alone.4 9
In sum, Campsall suggests that it is possible to imagine disputations
where one and the same opponent gives simultaneously to one and the
same respondent two contradictory sentences as distinct posita. It is
easy to see that the practical realization of such a disputation may easily
become quite complicated, but the theoretical possibility is interesting.
Obligational disputations following the rules of Swineshed are someThis
content downloaded from
147.251.94.99 on Mon, 07 Feb 2022 15:12:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
A R I S T O T L E ' S TOPICS 75
what simpler: instead of contrasting two opposite assumptions to each
other and connecting both to the actual truth, Swineshed simply contrasts
one assumption with the actual truth.
Even if Swineshed's rules are from the viewpoint of interpretation
quite simple, they were not widely accepted. His theory had the disadvantage
of allowing explicit contradictions to be granted - even if
connected to different backgrounds. It seems that later authors writing
about obligational theory thought that it should be possible to interpret
the set of granted sentences as a description of one situation.
5. C O N C L U S I O N
In Aristotelian dialectical disputations the tension is between the discussed
thesis and its refutation constructed during the dispute. Even if
obligational disputations are placed within the context of Aristotelian
dialectics, positum has a very different status in obligational disputations
than thesis has in Aristotle's dialectical disputations. The purpose of
an obligational disputation is not to build a refutation for the positum,
which is usually well known to be false.
Aristotle discusses the possibility of undertaking a disputation on a
highly improbable thesis, but even in this case the point of the disputation
is to find an interesting refutation for the thesis - not so much in
order to show that the thesis is false as for the sake of logical interest
in the refutation itself. As we saw above it is clear in Boethius's discussion
of obligations that the positum is not questioned in any way.
Rather, the case is that while in Aristotle the dialectical disputation
takes as its starting point reputable opinions (endoxa), the obligational
disputation is grounded on the positum or posita. It is also noteworthy
that the uncertainty connected with Aristotle's dialectics, in contrast to
the necessity of demonstration, is not to be found in obligational theory.
In obligational disputation sentences are granted or denied without
hesitation, and there is no discussion of different degrees of probability.
As I see it, this is because in early treatments of obligations discussion
is syntactic. Sentences put forward and answered in obligational disputation
did not carry any connection to beliefs.
According to the account given by Boethius an obligational disputation
is based on the posita so exclusively that an irrelevant sentence
is left out the discussion: it may be granted regardless of its alethic or
epistemic status, because the answer makes no difference to the disThis
content downloaded from
147.251.94.99 on Mon, 07 Feb 2022 15:12:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
76 M I K K O Y R J O N S U U R I
cussion. The discussion concentrates on the internal logical structure
of the set of the posita. The set is given as a fixed set in the beginning
of the disputation, and the propositions put forward afterward are of
secondary importance.
When we turn from Boethius to Burley, the point of the obligational
disputation changes. Positum still has the status of providing the ground
for the disputation, but, in Burley's theory, the point of the disputation
is to compare the positum with other sentences: to those following from
it, to those repugnant to it, and to the so-called irrelevant sentences.
The point of the disputation is, on the one hand, in the evaluation of
the logical relation of new sentences to the earlier granted sentences,
and, on the other, in building a consistent set combining the positum
with some irrelevant truths.
As we saw above, the Scotist rules, which later became the standard
rules, allow the positum to be expanded into a description of any
possible situation where the positum is true. Scotus's revision allows
the possibility of sensible interpretation. It seems that the main strand
of obligational thinkers believed that an obligational disputation may
concentrate on any expansion of the positum. Swineshed and the socalled
nova responsio had the viewpoint that the assumption given in
the positum may not be expanded by propositions put forward afterward:
the disputation must keep to what is given in the positum.
Advance in describing the situation is possible only through making
explicit what is implicit in the positum.
At the first sight it may seem that Kilvington's theory would be the
most useful. Kilvington assumes that the positum should be seen as
representing only one situation, and the disputation should concern this
situation. What is even more interesting, Kilvington explicitly connects
obligational technique with the so-called sophismata and the method of
laying down a casus as the basis of discussion.
This method was a widespread technique in thirteenth- and especially
fourteenth-century philosophy. Thought-experiments have always been
an important working method of philosophy; in the Middle Ages this
method often had the technical form of positing a casus and discussing
sentences whose truth-value is problematic in that casus. The method
was used in all sciences, from theology to jurisprudence. Particularly
interesting applications of the technique can be found in fourteenthcentury
English natural philosophy. Also, specific disputations on soThis
content downloaded from
147.251.94.99 on Mon, 07 Feb 2022 15:12:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
A R I S T O T L E ' S TOPICS 77
phisms employing the casus technique were common in fourteenthcentury
universities.
According to Kilvington's remarks on obligations it seems that he
looks at the sophismata disputation employing a casus somewhat like
this: the opponent chooses a situation, and lays down a description of
it as the casus. Then he asks questions about the situation, in order to
acquire both a proof and a disproof for some complex sentence, whose
interpretation is usually quite problematic. The respondent should grant
in his answers what is true and deny what is false in the situation given
with the casus. Naturally, he must either grant or deny the problematic
sentence itself: it cannot have both truth-values. The point of obligational
rules is to help the respondent in deciding whether a sentence
is true or false in the imagined situation given with the casus.
Given this kind of understanding of the point of obligational rules,
and the subjunctive mood of reasoning Kilvington employs, it is clear
that he must try to spell out the content of counterfactual conditionals
in the form of exact obligational rules. This is the idea of rules R 2 K
and R3 <K discussed above.
It is interesting to notice that Kilvington's theory was not rejected
because his treatment of counterfactual conditionals was insufficient,
but because counterfactual reasoning was not thought to fit into the
context of obligational reasoning. William Heytesbury criticizes Kilvington's
theory of obligation by emphasizing that all irrelevant sentences
must be evaluated according to their actual truth-value. Heytesbury's
examples show clearly that he had in mind those sentences that follow
counterfactually from the positum, but that lack logically necessary
connection. Such sentences are relevant according to Kilvington, but
irrelevant according to Burley and to Scotus.50
Heytesbury re-emphasizes, in the context of sophismata, Burley's
much discussed rule, according to which order of presentation may
make a difference to what should be granted. Heytesbury seems to
accept Kilvington's idea that casus of sophismata must be treated as an
obligational positum, but revised Kilvington's conception of how the
sentences should be interpreted. Heytesbury does not take the positum
as determining one situation as the background of the disputation:
according to Heytesbury the positum should be taken as a proposition,
and the disputation is about logical relationships between propositions
rather than about truth-values in an imagined situation.51
Thus the
This content downloaded from
147.251.94.99 on Mon, 07 Feb 2022 15:12:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
78 M I K K O Y R J O N S U U R I
point of obligational rules must be formulated in the following way,
based on literal reading of the rules: the rules should tell the respondent
what must be granted and what must be denied in a disputation based
on what follows from the given positum.
NOTES
* In writing this paper I have gained much from discussions with Simo Knuuttila and
Calvin Normore.
1
The translation is from Aristotle (1984, p. 167).
2
For modern discussion of the dialectical method presented in the Topics, see, e.g.,
Moraux (1968), Brunschwig (1985, pp. 31-40), and Kakkuri-Knuuttila (1990).
3
Aristotle (1984, p. 268).
4
"In an assembly of disputants discussing in the spirit not of a competition but of an
examination and inquiry, there are as yet no articulate rules about what the answerer
should aim at, and what kind of things he should and should not grant for the correct
and incorrect defence of his position" (Topics VIII, 5: Aristotle, 1984, p. 268).
5
Cf. Brunschwig (1985, pp. 39-40).
6
Boethius discusses Aristotelian theory of topics in De topicis differentiis (1891); the
translation is in Stump (1978). Also Boethius's commentary on Cicero's Topics was
important in the Middle Ages. See Boethius (1833); the translation is in Stump (1988).
7
Medieval theories of topics are discussed in Green-Pedersen (1984).
8
Cf. de Rijk (1980, pp. 72-75). See also texts edited in de Rijk (1967, e.g., pp. 122-
27, 148).
9
For dating of this work see the introduction in Boethius (1976).
1 0
"Licet dialectica doceat multa, ilia tamen multa attribuuntur alicui uni, quod principaliter
docet, scilicet modum arguendi dialectice" (Boethius, 1976, p. 16).
1 1
Aristotle (1984, p. 262).
1 2
Cf. Brunschwig (1985, pp. 37-38).
1 3
De Rijk (1980).
1 4
"Opponens autem in dialectica et respondens propter duas disputant causas, quarum
una est, ut sint exercitati in disputatione dialectica in sustinendo positionem et in opponendo
ad earn; secunda causa est ipsa cognitio veritatis" (Boethius, 1976, p. 309).
1 5
Boethius (1976, p. 311).
1 6
Questions 2-4 are the following: 'Utrum opponens debeat conari contra respondentem
in disputatione dialectica?"; "Utrum opponens debeat redarguere respondentem?";
"Utrum opponens debeat iuvare respondentem ad suam positionem sustinendum?" (Boethius,
1976, pp. 310-14).
1 7
"Disputatio dialectica commune opus est, et uterque alterum iuvat in illo opere, tamen
non iuvat opponens respondentem ad sustinendum positionem, quia tunc corrumperetur
commune opus nec esset iuvamentum commune" (Boethius, 1976, p. 314).
1 8
Boethius (1976, pp. 312-13).
1 9
"[1] Bene respondens debet esse talis, quod concedat opponenti omnia, quae concederet
sibi ipsi secum cogitanti, et eodem modo negare. [2] Debet ex naturali suo ingenio
vel ex habitu acquisito esse aptus ad concedendum verum et negandum falsum et debet
This content downloaded from
147.251.94.99 on Mon, 07 Feb 2022 15:12:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
A R I S T O T L E ' S TOPICS 79
diligere propter se verum. [3] Debet tertio cavere ne sit protervus, id est velle aliquam
positionem, pro qua non habet rationem et a qua per nullam rationem potest removeri.
Talis enim ad cognitionem veritatem non potest pervenire" (Boethius, 1976, p. 321).
2 0
Green (1963, pp. 2, 53, 81); de Rijk (1974, p. 103; 1975, p. 27).
2 1
The system of formalizing disputational duties I am here employing was first developed
in Knuuttila and Yrjonsuuri (1988).
2 2
Boethius (1976, pp. 321-23).
2 3
'Et cum hoc debes scire, quod in disputatione dialectica, quae est ad inquisitionem
veritatis vel ad exercitium in argumentis ad quodlibet propositum de facilli inveniendis
sive ad sustinendum positionem, saepe attenditur ars obligatoria. . ." (Boethius, 1976, p
329).
2 4
"[A]rs obligatoria, quae super hoc fundatur, quod opponens ponat omnes positiones,
quas vult ponere, et respondens debet eas concedere, sive sint probabiles sive improbabiles,
sive necessariae sive impossibles, dummodo non inveniat, quod sint incompossibiles
- sola enim est incompossibilitas causa, quare respondens debeat negare opponenti
aliquid eorum, quae vu't ponere - usque quo dixerit: "cedat tempus", et omnia quae
ante sunt posita intelligantur a respondente concessa. Tunc ex his, quae posita sunt,
interrogat opponens respondentem, et debet respondens concedere omnia consequentia
ad suam positionem . . . Et debet negare omnia repugnantia suae positioni. . ." (Boethius,
1976, p. 329-30).
2 5
"Et consistit ars ista in hoc quod in principio debet aliqua propositio poni, deinde
debent propositiones proponi secundum quod placet opponenti, ad quas debet respondens
respondere concedendo vel negando vel dubitando vel distinguendo. Quibus responsionibus
datis debet opponens, quando sibi placet, dicere: cedat tempus. Hoc est, cesset
tempus obligationis. Et tunc videndum est an respondens bene respondent vel non"
(Ockham, 1974, p. 736).
2 6
Boethius (1976, p. 330).
2 7
"[I]f then it seems to be true and is irrelevant, the answerer should grant it. ..; if it
does not seem to be true and is irrelevant, he should grant it. . ." (Aristotle, 1984, p.
269).
2 8
An anonymous treatise De petitionibus contrariorum (de Rijk, 1976) gives interesting
examples of obligational disputations following rules at least similar to, if not the same
as, those given by Boethius. The structure of the sophisms in this collection is the
following: a set of sentences is first given, and after them one sentence is put forward,
but it cannot be granted nor denied, because it both follows from and is inconsistent with
the set given in the beginning. The solution of the sophism consists in showing how the
original set of sentences is inconsistent and cannot be accepted. Some of the examples
are paradoxical rather than implicitly inconsistent.
2 9
For dating this treatise, see Spade and Stump (1983).
3 0
"Si sit impertinens, respondendum est secundum sui qualitatem, et hoc, secundum
qualitatem quam habet ad nos. Ut, si sit verum, scitum esse verum, debet concedi. Si sit
falsum, scitum esse falsum, debet negari. Si sit dubium, respondendum est dubie" (Green,
1963, p. 48).
3 1
"Omne sequens ex posito cum concesso vel cum concessis, vel cum opposito bene
negati vel oppositis bene negatorum, scitum esse tale, est concedendum.... Omne
repugnans posito cum concesso vel concessis, vel opposito bene negati vel oppositis bene
negatorum, scitum esse tale, est negandum" (Green, 1963, p. 48).
This content downloaded from
147.251.94.99 on Mon, 07 Feb 2022 15:12:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
80 M I K K O Y R J O N S U U R I
3 2
For the sake of brevity I omit discussion of the epistemic conditions in the rules.
3 3
See, e.g., de Rijk (1974, pp. 104-06; 1975, p. 28).
3 4
"Respondendum est ad omnia proposita ac si essent proposita in eodem instanti, sic
quod, durante tempore obligationis, non debent aliqua concedi nisi quae possunt sustineri
pro eodem instanti. Et quia repugnantia non possunt pro eodem instanti sustineri, ideo,
durante tempore obligationis, non debent repugnantia concedi" (Green, 1963, p. 62).
3 5
"Posito falso contingenti de praesenti instanti, negandum est praesens instans esse"
(Green, 1963, p. 59). See also other formulations of the rule in de Rijk (1974, p. 112;
1975, p. 32) and Green (1963, p. 8).
3 6
"Ilia regula falsa est et probatio non valet, quia licet positum debeat sustineri sicut
verum, potest tamen sustineri pro illo instanti non negando illud instans esse pro quo est
falsum" (Scotus, 1960, p. 423).
3 7
Cf. Knuuttila and Yrjonsuuri (1988, pp. 199-201) and Knuuttila (1989, pp. 86-87).
3 8
For modern discussion of Scotus's remarks, see, e.g., Knuuttila (1981, pp. 229-30),
Spade and Stump (1983, pp. 20-24), and Normore (1985, pp. 3-22).
3 9
Kretzmann and Kretzmann (1990, pp. xxvi-xxvii).
4 0
See Kretzmann and Kretzmann (1990, pp. 121-33). For discussion of Kilvington's
theory see Spade (1982, pp. 19-28) and Stump (1981, pp. 143-53). Kilvington does not
give as explicit rules as the authors above discussed, but it seems possible to construct
such rules on the basis of his discussion.
4 1
Edited and translated in Kretzmann and Stump (1985).
4 2
"Omnis propositio quae [sequitur] ex posito et aliquo impertinenti vel veris est concedenda"
(Kretzmann and Stump, 1985, p. 215).
4 3
Swineshed's treatise was written probably between 1330-35. See Spade (1977, p. 246).
It is edited in Spade (1977).
4 4
Swineshed gives his rules as follows: "Omne positum sine obligatione ad hoc pertinente
non repugnans positioni in tempore positionis est concedendun"; "Omne sequens ex
posito sine obligatione ad hoc pertinente non repugnans positioni in tempore obligationis
est concedendum"; "Omne repugnans posito sine obligatione ad hoc pertinente non
repugnans positioni in tempore positionis est negandum"; "Ad impertinens sine obligatione
ad hoc pertinente velut per illud quod principaliter concipitur respondendum est"
(Spade, 1977, pp. 265-66).
4 5
"Propter concessionem partium copulativae non est copulativa concedenda nec propter
concessionem disjunctivae est aliqua pars ejus concedenda" (Spade, 1977, p. 257).
4 6
"Concedenda est conclusio quod tria repugnantia sunt concedenda et quattour et sic
deinceps" (Spade, 1977, p. 274).
4 7
"[DJicendum quod non sequitur quod, si utraque pars est concedenda divisim, quod
ipsa copulativa sit concedenda" (Green, 1963, p. 7).
4 8
"Neganda est ista consequencia: 'iste partes sunt concedenda, igitur copulativa est
concedenda"'(Campsall, 1968, p. 237).
4 9
"Possibile est quod unus homo ponat tibi unum oppositorum ad sustinendum, et quod
alius ponat suum oppositum ad dubitandum; sicud, igitur possibile est concedere unum
contradictorum in una disputatione, et dubitare suum oppositum pro eodem tempore in
alia disputatione, ita unum oppositorum post sustineri in comparacione ad unum, et suum
oppositum in comparacione ad alium; nunc arguo: ad quodcunque sustinendum potest
aliquis obligari a multis, ad illud sustinendum potest obligari ab uno. . . " (Campsall.
1968, p. 227).
This content downloaded from
147.251.94.99 on Mon, 07 Feb 2022 15:12:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
A R I S T O T L E ' S TOPICS 81
Heytesbury comments on obligational theory in chapter "De scire et dubitare" in his
Regulae solvendi sophismata, and at the end of his De sensu composito et diviso. Both
are printed in Heytesbury (1494).
5 1
The metalinguistic character of Heytesbury's way of discussing sophisms has been
discussed by Murdoch (see, e.g., 1979).
R E F E R E N C E S
Aristotle: 1984, The Complete Works of Aristotle, Bollingen series, Vol. 71(2), Princeton
University Press, Princeton.
Boethius, Anicius Manlius Severinus: 1833, Commentarii in Ciceronis Topica, in Ciceronis
Opera, Vol. V(l), ed. J. C. Orelli and G. Baiterus, Fuesslini, Zurich.
Boethius, Anicius Manlius Severinus: 1891, De topiciis differentiis, in Patrologia Latina,
Vol. LXIV, ed. J.-P. Migne, Paris.
Boethius de Dacia: 1976, Quaestiones super librum Topicorum, Corpus Philosophorum
Danicorum Medii Aevi, Vol. 6, ed. N. J. Green-Pedersen and J. Pinborg, Gad,
Copenhagen.
Brunschwig, J.: 1985, 'Aristotle on Arguments without Winners or Losers', Wissenschaftskolleg,
Jahrbuch 1984/85, 31-40.
Campsall, Richard of: 1968, Questiones super librum Priorum Analyticorum, in The
Works of Richard of Campsall, Vol. I, ed. E . A. Synan, Pontificial Institute of Medieval
Studies, Toronto.
De Rijk, L. M . : 1967, Logica modernorum: A Contribution to the History of Early
Terminist Logic, Vol. 11(2), Van Gorcum, Assen.
De Rijk, L . M.: 1974, 'Some Thirteenth Century Tracts of the Game of Obligation I',
Vivarium 12, 94-123.
De Rijk, L. M.: 1975, 'Some Thirteenth Century Tracts of the Game of Obligation II',
Vivarium 13, 22-54.
De Rijk, L. M.: 1976, 'Some Thirteenth Century Tracts of the Game of Obligation III',
Vivarium 14, 26-49.
De Rijk, L. M.: 1980, Die mittelalterlichen Tractate De modo opponendi et respondendi,
Beitrage zur Geschichte der Philosophic und Theologie des Mittelalters, Neue Folge,
Band 17, Aschendorff, Miinster.
Green, R.: 1963, The Logical Treatise 'De obligationibus': An Introduction with Critical
Texts of William of Sherwood(?) and Walter Burley, Vol. II, Ph.D. Dissertation,
Louvain.
Green-Pedersen, N. J.: 1984, The Tradition of Topics in the Middle Ages, Philosophia
Verlag, Munchen.
Heytesbury, William: 1494, Tractatus Gulielmi Hentisberi de sensu composito et diviso,
Regulae eiusdem curm sophismatibus . . . , Bonetus Locatellus, Venice.
Kakkuri-Knuuttila, M.-L.: 1990, 'Dialogue Games in Aristotle', in M. Kusch and H .
Schroder (eds.), Text-Interpretation-Argumentation, Buske, Hamburg, pp. 221-72.
Knuuttila, S.: 1982, 'Time and Modality in Scholasticism', in S. Knuuttila (ed.), Reforging
the Great Chain of Being: Studies in the History of Modal Theories, Synthese Historical
Library, Vol. 20, D. Reidel, Dordrecht, pp. 187-98.
Knuuttila, S.: 1989, 'Modalities in Obligational Disputations', in Atti del Convegno
This content downloaded from
147.251.94.99 on Mon, 07 Feb 2022 15:12:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
82 M I K K O Y R J O N S U U R I
Internationale di Storia delta Logica, Le Teorie delle Modalita, Clueb, Bologna, pp.
79-92.
Knuuttila, S. and M. Yrjonsuuri: 1988, 'Norms and Action in Obligational Disputations',
in O. Pluta (ed.), Die Philosophic im 14. und 15. Jahrhundert. In Memoriam Konstanty
Michalski (1879-1947), Bochumer Studien zur Philosophic, Band 10, B. R. Griiner,
Amsterdam, pp. 191-202.
Kretzmann, N. and B. E . Kretzmann: 1990. The Sophismata of Richard Kilvington.
Introduction, Translation and Commentary, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Kretzmann, N. and E . Stump: 1985, 'The anonymous De arte obligatoria in Merton
College MS 306', in E. P. Bos (ed.), Mediaeval Semantics and Metaphysics, Studies
Dedicated to L. M. de Rijk, Ph.D. on the Occasion of his 60th Birthday, Ingenium,
Nijmegen, pp. 239-80.
Moraux, P.: 1968, 'La joute dialectique d'apres le huitieme livre des Topiques', in G. E .
L. Owen (ed.), Aristotle on Dialectic, Proceedings of the Third Symposium Aristotelicum,
Clarendon Press, Oxford, pp. 277-311.
Murdoch, J.: 1979, 'Prepositional Analysis in the Fourteenth-Century Natural Philosophy',
Synthese 40, 117-46.
Normore, C : 1985, 'Divine Omniscience, Omnipotence and Future Contingents: An
Overview', in T. Rudavsky (ed.), Divine Omniscience and Omnipotence in Medieval
Philosophy, D. Reidel, Dordrecht, pp. 3-22.
Ockham, William: 1974, Summa Logicae, in Opera Philosophica I, ed. P. Boehner, G.
Gal, and S. Brown, The Franciscan Institute, St. Bonaventure.
Scotus, John Duns: 1960, Lectura in librum primum Sententiarum, in Opera Omnia, Vol.
17, ed. C. Balic et al, Vatican Scotistic Commission, Vatican.
Spade, P.: 1977, 'Roger Swyneshed's Obligationes: Edition and Comments', Archives
d'histoire doctrinale et litteraire du moyen age 44, 243-85.
Spade, P.: 1982, 'Three Theories of Obligationes: Burley, Kilvington and Swyneshed on
Counterfactual Reasoning', History and Philosophy of Logic 3, 1-32.
Spade, P. and E. Stump: 1983, 'Walter Burley and the Obligationes Attributed to William
of Sherwood', History and Philosophy of Logic 4, 9-26.
Stump, E: 1978, Boethius's De topiciis differentiis, translated, with notes and essays on
the text, Cornell University Press, Ithaca.
Stump, E.: 1981, 'Roger Swyneshed's Theory of Obligations', Medioevo 7, 135-74.
Stump, E.: 1988, Boethius's In Ciceronis Topica, translated, with notes and introduction,
Cornell University Press, Ithaca.
Department of Philosophy
University of Joensuu
PoB 111
SF-80101 Joensuu
Finland
This content downloaded from
147.251.94.99 on Mon, 07 Feb 2022 15:12:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms